[Music]
so last
week I told
you I offered you an interpretation of
two foundational stories right well more
than two but roughly speaking two
um the creation stories because there's
two of the in Genesis and then also the
story of the Buddha and I was presenting
you with a proposition and it's a
multi-layered proposition the the first
proposition is that the archetypal story
structure that we've already been
discussing is reflected in detail in
those stories and the archetypal story
structure is something like the
existence of a pre-existing state where
things are roughly functional so that
you might think of that as the state of
things going well and that's a state
where your perceptions and your plans
are sufficiently developed so that when
you act them out in the world not only
do you get what you desire but the the
story itself validates itself through
your actions right because what happens
when you act something out and you get
what you intend just like when you use a
map and get where you're going not only
does that get you to where you're going
but it also validates the plan or the
map and so that's that's that's a
definition of truth that's a pragmatic
definition of Truth this is the sort of
thing that I was trying to have a
discussion with about Sam Harris because
the idea is that we have to orient
ourselves in a world where our knowledge
is always insufficient we never know
everything about anything and so the
question then is how can you ever make a
judgment about whether or not you're
correct and the answer to that is
something like well you lay out a plan
and you can think about it this way this
is actually an answer
to the postmodernist problem of how is
it that you determine whether or not
your interpretation of the world is we
won't say correct because that's not
exactly right but you know the
postmodernists object say with regards
to the interpretation of a text that
there's a very large number of
variations of ways in which that text
can be interpreted and that's actually
true and it's the same it's a it's
actually reflection of a deeper claim
which they always often sometimes also
make which is well if that's true for a
text which isn't as comp comp Lex as
everything although it's complex then
it's even more true for everything which
is to say the world lays itself out in a
very complex Manner and you can
interpret that in a very large number of
ways so who's to say which
interpretation is correct okay fair
enough it's a reasonable objection and
it's it's tied in with even a deeper
problem which is the problem of
perception itself because if the world
is laid out in a manner that's
exceptionally complex then how is it
that you can even perceive it well
that's that's partly the question that
we're trying to answer and the answer to
that is well you have evolved perceptual
structures and they're actually oriented
towards specific goals and you're
embodied so the your embodiment as a
goal directed entity is part of the
solution to the problem of perception
but it's more complicated than that so
we could say well you come equipped and
this was kant's objection to Pure reason
essentially um that the the problem is
is the facts don't speak for themselves
there's too many facts for them to speak
for themselves so you have to overlay on
top of them an interpretive framework
well where does the interpretive
framework come from well the right
answer to that is something like it
evolves right it's taken three and a
half billion years for your perceptual
structure your embodied perceptual
structure to evolve and it's done that I
roughly in a trial and error process I
don't think that exhausts what's
happened over the course of evolution
but it's a good enough shorthand for the
time being
so so there's the constraints imposed on
your perceptual structures by the
necessity of survival and reproduction
but there's other constraints imposed
too that you might regard as subsets of
that one is that because you exist in a
cooperative and competitive landscape
the perceptual structures and plans that
you lay out we'll say the maps that you
lay out have to be negotiated with other
people and so that puts stringent
constraints on the number of
interpretations that you're allowed to
to apply so you can think about this in
a p jedian sense that is if there
children in a playground and they're
trying to organize themselves to play
they have to agree on a game and the
game is of course a perceptual structure
and a goal directed structure and a
structure that that delimits action and
interactions and so they at least have
to settle on a game and so that
constrains the set of possible actions
and Perceptions in the environment to
those that are deemed socially
acceptable and then you say well what
are the further constraints and the
constraints might be well let's play the
game and see if it's any fun and that
means that you have to take the plan
that you've organized consensually and
then lay it out in the actual world and
see if when you lay it out in the world
it does what it's supposed to do in some
sense what you're doing is testing a
tool so the idea that the the range of
interpretations is infinite and
unconstrained turns out to be incorrect
and now it's that that is that doesn't
mean it's easy to figure out how they're
constrained but the technical suggestion
that well there's an infinite number of
equally valid interpretations is just
not correct it's not correct and it's
not correct on biological evolutionary
grounds and it's not it's also not
correct on social cultural grounds
because it has to be negotiated and then
you know P put a further constraint on
that essentially by saying well not only
does it have to be a game and a game
that attains its ends but it has to be a
game that people want to play so it also
has to satisfy some element of
subjective desire as well so that's
three levels of constraint right it has
to be a game you want to play it has to
be a game that you can play with other
people and it has to be a game that if
you play with other people actually
works in the world okay well so much for
an infinite array of of options it's a
very constrained array of options now
and I think and that the idea that I've
been proposing to you is that what
evolved mythology does these
representations that we've been dealing
with these archetypal representations is
sketch out that landscape what what is
the landscape of playable games that's a
good way of thinking about it and so
it's it sets out a landscape it it sets
out a description of the landscape in
which the game is going to be played as
well as a description of the land of of
the game itself and so the landscape is
roughly the the the the core the core
archetype seems to be something like
it's it it's it's something like the
interplay between Chaos and Order and
Chaos is represented by
the serpenti Predator because we use our
Predator detection circuits to
conceptualize the unknown because what
else would we
do it that that that
seems given that we're prey animals and
given our evolutionary history it's very
difficult to understand what else we
would possibly do because the critical
issue about venturing into the unknown
is that you might die or perhaps a
slight variant of that is something
might kill you but whatever those are
close enough to the same thing so chaos
is what causes your deterioration and
death and there's lots of ways to
conceptualize that but but uh reptilian
Predator fire breathing reptilian
Predator isn't a bad way to start and so
the question is well what do you do in
the face of that and one answer is you
build circumscribed enclosures that's
order and then also you act as the
Builder of circumscribed enclosures so
that's partly the hero now the hero is
also though that's not good enough
because the circumscribed enclosure
isn't impermeable it can
invaded it will inevitably be invaded
either from the outside or from within
right and so we've been conceptualizing
the the the Predator the malevolent
Predator at multiple levels of analysis
throughout our evolutionary history say
but also in our symbolic history trying
to understand the nature of that which
invades the enclosure right and we can
say well it's partly external threat
it's partly social threat but it's also
partly the threat that each individual
brings to bear on the social structure
because of our let's say our intrinsic
malevolence and so that would be the
snakes within and so that accounts for
the analogy the the Christian analogy
between the serpent in the Garden of
Eden and Satan which is a very very
strange analogy it's not obvious at all
why those two things would stack on top
of one another especially given that
when the creation story originally
emerged in in in the form I talked to
you about last week the story of Adam
and Eve the idea that the serpent in the
garden was also something that was
associated with the adversary wasn't an
implicit part of the story that got laid
on afterwards it's like well what's the
worst possible snake well that's a
reasonable question and then a better
question is what do you do about the
worst possible snake and one answer is
you face it but there's other answers
too like you make sacrifices right and
that's how you Stave off the dragon of
temporal chaos roughly speaking is that
you learn to conceptualize the future
you see the future as a realm of
Potential Threat and then you learn to
give things up in the present and
somehow that satisfies the future now so
maybe you're offering sacrifices to God
and you think well why does that well
think you got to think about that
psychologically why does that work well
you could think about the spirit of God
the father as an imagistic
representation of the collective Spirit
of the group we'll call it the
patriarchy if you want doesn't matter
it's the thing that's common across the
group as a spirit as a psychological
Force across time why do you make
sacrifices to that that is what you do
all the time you're right now you're
sacrificing your time to the spirit of
the great father because your assumption
is is that if you do what's diligent so
you're not chasing impulse of pleasure
at the moment unless you're
pathologically interested in this class
or something like that you're not
chasing impulse of Interest you're
sacrificing your impulse of interest to
satisfy the spirit of social requirement
and so you're offering a sacrifice to
that spirit in the hope that you can
make a bargain with it so that it will
reward you in the future and that reward
will be part of partly the staving off
of insecurity which is no more than to
say that part of the reason that you're
getting your degree is because you
believe that it'll Aid you in finding
employment and status and all the other
things that will Stave off the dragon of
chaos so now those things were as as
we've been at pains to to to point out
is those things were it out and then
represented in image and story long
before they could be fully articulated
because we're building our knowledge of
ourselves and also our social structures
and also the world from the bottom up as
well as from the top down there's an
interplay between the two levels of
analysis okay and
so so that's partly that's partly the
archetypal underpinning and then with
regards to the stories themselves you're
you're in a map so to speak you're using
a map and with any luck it's detailed
enough so that you can use it to get to
the place that you want to go and
sometimes you don't and that means that
you have to recalibrate your your
journey along the map which by the way
is exactly what GPS systems do when you
go off the pathway right they stop
that's an anxiety response from the GPS
system they stop they recalibrate and
they readjust the map now and then if
you're unfortunate this very rarely
happens anymore you'll be on a road that
isn't mapped and then the GPS system
doesn't know what to do well that
happens in real life too I mean those
are I'm using GPS for a very specific
reason those are intelligence systems as
far as I'm concerned those are the
closest things we've ever designed to
intelligence systems because they can
actually Orient right they Orient in
real time and they're unbelievably
sophisticated systems right because they
rely on a huge satellite Network and and
so on and they're cybernetic systems
technically speaking they they respond
very much like the way that that we
respond so so anyways you know you're
you inhabit a map you try to adjust the
resolution of the map so that it's no
more complex than it needs to be to get
you from point A to point B that's it
you want minimal resolution because that
enables efficient cognitive processing
it doesn't overload you too much like
when I'm looking at this room if I look
say I want to walk down this pathway
basically what my mind does my
perceptual field and you can detect this
if I look straight ahead I can barely
see you people on the periphery you're
more like you're kind of like blurs
you two I can tell that you have heads
but that's about it when you move I can
see your hand I can probably see your
eyes but barely so you're all very low
resolution and even though I can't
detect it at the very periphery of my
vision you guys are black and white so
my color vision disappears at the
periphery even though I can't I can't
actually perceive that so what happens
is if I want to walk down here this
pathway becomes high resolution it
becomes marked with positive emotion all
of this turns into low resolution back
here it's not even repres presented and
then I find out well am I doing this
properly and the answer is well I walk
forward and if I get to the goal then
I've done it properly enough and if you
know one of you stand up and get in my
way then I'm going to focus on you and
assume instantly that I haven't mapped
you properly right I I put you in the
category of irrelevant entity when in
fact you happen to be in the category of
strange object the thing that objects
and so well so then we inhabit those
structures all the time we're in a
structure like that a perceptual
structure and if it's working then it's
got the archetypal quality of paradise
so to speak because its axioms are
correct and it's functional and then now
and then something comes along and
that's what the snake is the Eternal
snake in the garden that pops up inside
a structure and it turns out that the
things that you weren't attending to are
the most important things rather than
the least important things and then what
does that do it blows them out into
pieces and that can happen at different
levels of severity but at the ultimate
level of severity it's
apocalyptic right everything goes and
that's a that's a traumatic intrusion
and essentially the story of the Garden
of Eden is the story of a traumatic
intrusion that's exactly what it is and
so what happens is that Adam and Eve are
living in unconscious Bliss roughly
speaking everything's fine they're in
their Walled Garden they're in a
paradisal state they're not aware of
their own vulnerability or nakedness so
they they they're not suffering from
negative emotion something pops up that
radically expands their vision and all
of a sudden now they they can apprehend
all sorts of things that exist as
threats so that's their own nakedness
and vulnerability and temporality itself
because they become aware of the future
and bang that state of being in that
paradise is forever gone that's the
strange thing about human beings is this
is what what happened to us I think is
that our perceptions developed to such a
degree that we could no longer ignore
what was irrelevant we couldn't do it
because we discovered roughly speaking
once we discovered our finite
limitations in time and space we
discovered that we were surrounded by
infinite threat always and maybe that's
why people are so hyper awake because
threat wakes you up while we're in a
constant state of existential threat now
the advantage to that is that we
take we take arms up against a sea of
troubles constantly that's the advantage
right and we build inclosures and we
take precautions for the future and we
live a very long time and we generally
live quite safe lives compared to the
lives we could live and so we've traded
pain for anxiety that's another way of
thinking about it now it's still a
pretty rough trade right because who
wants to be nervous all the time but
you're alive and awake when you're
nervous and it is a form of
Consciousness elevating um activation
that's another way of thinking about it
so the story of Adam and Eve is the
story of the Eternal fall that that's
what it is it says look you exist in
these walled enclosures but there's
something that lurks that will always
knock you off your feet and then the
question is what is that and and the
answer to that has being formulated over
very long periods of time partly it's
the probability of predation itself
that's the snake the thing that can come
in subtly and undermine you okay but
then that's
that's what would you call it expanded
upward to include the abstract snake
which is that thing that can undermine
your conceptual schemes right so you
have your actual territory and then you
have your abstract territory and in your
actual territory there are actual snakes
and in your abstract territory there are
abstract snakes right and then the worst
snake of all is malevolence and that's I
think that's technically correct because
one of the things that you view for
example when you're looking at
post-traumatic stress disorder is that
it's almost always the case that someone
who suffers from post-traumatic stress
disorder which you might think of as a
real real life Reincarnation of the Fall
is that people encounter something
malevolent and it breaks them because
it's the worst thing to understand it's
like suffering is one thing man that's
that's bad enough vulnerability and
suffering that's bad enough but to
encounter someone who wishes that upon
you and will work to bring it about
that's a whole different category of
horrible especially when it also reflect
something back to you about yourself
because if someone else can do that to
you and they're human that means that
you partake of the same Essence
strangely enough that's actually the
cure to some degree to post-traumatic
stress disorder is that like if you've
been victimized you're naive and you've
been victimized the way out of that is
to no longer be naive and to no longer
be victimized and that means that you
you see this reflected in the Harry
Potter idea for example that the reason
that Harry Potter can withstand
Voldemort is because he's got a piece of
them or he's been touched by it and the
way that you the way that you keep the
Psychopaths at Bay is to develop the
inner psychopath so that you know one
when you see one right and then but
that's a voluntary thing it's so it's
like a it's like a a set of tools that
you have at your disposal which is full
knowledge of evil and that does NCH said
if you look into an abyss for too long
you risk having the abyss gaze back into
you right the idea is that if you look
at something monstrous you have a
tendency to turn into a monster and
people are often very afraid of looking
at monsters things exactly for that
reason and then the question is well
should you turn into a monster and the
answer to that is yes you should but you
should do it voluntarily and not
accidentally and you should do it with
the good in mind rather than falling
prey to it by possession essentially
because that's the alternative and how
does it possess you that's easy your
suffering makes you bitter your
bitterness makes you resentful your
resentful means makes you vengeful and
once you're on that road you go down
that a little bit farther
man well you end up fantasizing in your
basement about shooting up the local
high school and then killing yourself
right because that's sort of the
ultimate end of that line of
pathological reasoning being should be
eradicated because of its intrinsic evil
and I'm exactly the person to do it and
I'll cap it off with an indication of my
own lack of worth just to hammer the
point home right and if I can Garner a
little post postumus Fame along the way
well that'll satisfy my primordial
primate dominance hierarchy uh
imaginings too at least in fantasy so
you know it's the full package if you
want to go down that route and of course
people don't like to think about that
sort of thing and it's no bloody Wonder
but without the capability for Mayhem
you're a you're you're a you're a
potential victim to Mayhem so you need
your sword it should be sheathed but you
need to have it and it's very frequently
the case if you treat someone with
post-traumatic stress disorder there's
two things you have to do you have to
help them develop a very articulated
philosophy of evil because otherwise
their brain bothers them over and over
and over why were you so NE naive how
did you become victimized why were you
such a sucker these are good questions
you don't want to have that happen to
you again you don't want to be exploited
twice okay so your eyes have to open up
we know the price of that from the
Egyptian myth right you come into
contact with Seth what happens even if
you're a God you lose an eye it's no
joke man it's no joke and then the cure
for that is the movement down into the
underworld and the revitalization of the
father that's the identification with
the force that created culture right and
that then there's you and that together
then you can withstand malevolence maybe
you can withstand tragedy and
malevolence and then that's the whole
secret right because that's what you
want in life you need to be able to
withstand tragedy and you need to be
able to withstand malevolence because
those are the forces that are always
working against you and so it's this is
associated with the Union idea of
incorporation of the Shadow right you
have to be we know this God we know how
Predators work with regards to Children
even if you're a pedophilic predator and
you're looking at a landscape of
children the child that you're going to
go after is the one that's timid and
won't fight back you pick your victim
and predatory people in general are
exactly like that man they're because
they're Predators they're not going to
attack someone who's who's going to
fight back in fact the issue is likely
not to even come up they're going to be
looking for someone one way or another
that cannot conceptualize what they are
and then perfect it's it's an Open
Season man it's open season and so if
you're treating someone with
post-traumatic stress disorder first
they need an introduction to the
philosophy of malevolence and second
they have to learn to become dangerous
because that's the only way out what's
the
alternative they get these recurrent
thoughts about their vulnerability in
the face of malevolence and their own
naivity because by definition if someone
Psychopathic has exploited you you're
too naive it's it's a definitional issue
you can say well that's no fault of mine
how the hell could I be prepared fair
enough man a perfectly reasonable
objection doesn't solve your problem
because it's an it's an eternal problem
right the internal problem is how do you
deal with tragedy and malevolence and
you can say well I'm not prepared it's
like yeah fair enough unsurprising
especially if you were overprotected as
a child it's not a good idea to
overprotect your kids because the snakes
are going to come into the garden no
matter what you do and so then you
instead of trying to keep the damn
snakes away what you do is you arm your
child with something that can help them
chop them into pieces and make the world
out of them so that the trick for
human thriving in the face of suffering
and malevolence is strength not
protection it's a completely different
idea we also know this clinically we
know for example that if you treat
people with exposure therapy for
agobia which is roughly speaking the
fear of chaos I would say the fear of
everything you don't make them less
afraid you make them braver it's not the
same thing because with an agrob see
what happens to them is is the fault
they never conceptualize death and
suffering they're naive right it it
never enters their the theater of their
imagination and it's because they're
protected from it but then something
happens this this often happens to women
in their 40s because they're they're the
people most likely to develop
agobia something happens they they've
been protected from chaos by Authority
their entire life so maybe they had an
overprotective father and then they went
to an overprotective boyfriend and then
they went to an overprotective husband
and maybe they were willing to be
subjugated to all three of those because
of the pro protection right so so that's
the bargain they they stay weak and
dependent and maybe they have to because
that's the only way they can appeal to
the person who's hyper protective but
the price they pay for that is that
they're not sufficiently competent and
then something happens in their life
often in their 40s they develop heart
palpitations maybe as a consequence of
menopause their heart starts to beat
erratically and they think oh no death
it's like well who are you going to talk
to about that right there's no
protection from Authority for that
or maybe their friend gets divorced or
maybe their sister dies or something
like that it brings up the Spectre of
mortality and maybe the Spectre of
malevolence and mortality and it brings
it up in a way that Authority recourse
to Authority cannot solve and so then
they have panic attacks what happens
they go out they get afraid they feel
their heart beating then they get afraid
of their heart beating because they
think oh no I'm going to die and they
think oh no I'm going to die and I'm
going to make a fool of myself while I'm
doing it and attract a lot of attention
so the two big fears come up mortality
and social judgment then they have a
panic attack it's like fight or flight's
gone out of control very very unpleasant
then they start to avoid the places
they've had a panic attack then they end
up not being able to go anywhere so then
Tiamat has come back right a huge
monster a little victim and so what do
you do with them well there's no saying
no there's no tiat that's done right
their naivity is over they they've had a
direct contact with the threat of
mortality and social judgment they've
met the terrible mother and they've met
the terrible father and there's no going
back there's no saying oh the world is
safe it's not safe not at all it's not
safe the fact that you think it's safe
means that you were living in an
unconscious bubble that was sort of
provided to you by your culture it's a
gift and now that's been shattered and
so now what do you do well the answer is
you Retreat until you're in your house
and there's nowhere you can go you're
the ultimate Frozen rabbit right and
your life is hell because you can't
function the alternative is let's take
apart the things you're afraid of let's
expose you to them you know carefully
and
programmatically and then you'll learn
that you can you're actually tougher
than you think you never knew that and
maybe you didn't want to take on the
responsibility because you know people
play a role in their own demise so to
speak when you had opportunity to go out
and explore or with draw because you
were afraid you chose to withdraw
because you were afraid so it's not only
that you were overprotected often it's
that you were willing to take advantage
of the fact that you were overprotected
and run back there whenever you had the
opportunity you know so maybe you're a
kid in the playground right and you're
having some trouble with other kids and
you know in the back of your mind I
should deal this with deal with this
myself but you go and tell your mom and
get her to intervene and you know that
that's not right you know that you're
breaking the social contract but it's
easier and so that's what you do you run
off to an authority figure and hide
behind the great father right roughly
speaking well the problem with that is
you don't learn how to do it yourself so
then you have to relearn it painfully
when you're 40 so then you take people
out you say well what are you afraid of
rank it from 1 to 10 so 10 is make a
list of 10 things you're afraid of the
least the thing you're least afraid of
will call number 10 so we'll start with
that okay well I'm afraid of elevators
okay well let's let's look at a picture
of an elev
let's have you imagine being in an
elevator let's go out to an elevator and
let you watch the terrible jaws of death
open because that's how you're
responding to it symbolically right and
you're going to do that at at the the
closest proximity you can manage you
find out you go do that it works you're
nervous as hell especially from an
anticipatory perspective shaking you go
out you stop you watch it happen and you
actually calm down you do that 10 times
and it no longer B bothers you well well
you've learned that you didn't die but
more importantly than that you've
learned that you could withstand the
threat of death that's what you've
learned and then you move a little
closer and then you move a little closer
and then you move a little closer and
finally you're back in what's no longer
the elevator from a symbolic perspective
it's a tomb right it's it's it's a place
of enclosure and isolation and you learn
hm turns out I can withstand that and
then you're met much more together much
more confident and that's often one of
the things that often happens in
situations like that I've seen this
multiple times is that if you run
someone through an exposure training
process like that and and toughen them
up they'll often start standing up to
people around them in a way they never
did before because they wouldn't stand
up for themselves before because they
weren't willing to undermine the
protection see if you're protecting me I
can't bother you because I can't afford
to forsake your protection
so if I'm going to play that game I'm
going to be hide behind you then I can't
challenge you so that's no good because
that's sometimes why people you see this
with guys very frequently they're still
deathly afraid of their father's
judgment when they're in their 30s or
40s it's like well why well because they
still want to believe that there's
someone out there that knows and so
they're willing to accept the
subjugation because it doesn't force
them to challenge the idea that there's
someone out there that knows cuz that's
the advantage of having your father as
as a judge right cuz he knows well what
if he doesn't what if no one knows any
better than you well that's a rough
thing you don't Until you realize that
you're not an adult right that's really
technically the point of realization of
adulthood is that no one actually knows
what you should do more than you do I
mean it's a horrible realization because
what the hell do you know it's a
terrible realization and people will
often pick
slavery permanent slavery to the spirit
of the great father let's say over that
realization and it's completely
understandable but the problem with it
is is that there's more to you than you
think and so if you continue to hide
behind that figure then you never have a
chance to understand that there's more
to you than you think far more to you
than you think maybe there's enough to
you so that you can actually withstand
the threat of mortality without
collapsing maybe even withstand the
threat of malevolence without collapsing
who knows it's certainly possible and
it's not an abstract question it's
exactly the sort of question that you
address in the psychotherapeutic process
it's it's always the question that you
address and the answer is often in the
affirmative because people can get
unbelievably tough and you know that
because people work in emergency Wards
and hospitals right or they work in in
paliative care Wards or they work as
Mortuary assistants I mean these people
have Bloody rough jobs you know or
they're on the front line of police
investigation into you know highness
child abuse crimes and so they're
confronting malevolence on a regular
basis and you know those are very
stressful jobs but people do them and
and some people do them without even
being damaged by them although that's a
harder thing because you can see
horrible things you know things you'll
never forget
so so I would say the the story in the
story of Adam and Eve is a meta story
and it's a meta story for two reasons
one is it's about how stories transform
because Adam and Eve are in this
conscious paradise and then it collapses
and that happens to every potential
story right that's nich's realization he
said look imagine that you live within a
belief system and then something arises
to challenge the belief system not only
does the belief system collapse but
something worse happens your belief in
belief systems collapses and that's the
road toight now it doesn't have to
because you can jump from one belief
system to another but sometimes that
doesn't work is that you do a metac
critique and you say oh I was living in
this protective structure and it turned
out to be flawed okay one alternative is
jump to another protective structure
fine another alternative is protective
structures themselves are not to be
trusted bang you're in chaos how the
hell are you going to get out of that
that's the pathway to nalism well you
can you can you can work your way
through that that's difficult or you can
do what Yung would regard as a soul
damaging move and you can sacrifice your
new knowledge and re-identify with
something rigid restricted which is what
I would say is happening to some degree
with the people in Europe who are
turning to a regressive nationalism as
an alternative to to the current state
of chaos it's like I know that that
people need to identify with local
groups I understand that but that they
risk the danger of making the state the
ultimate God and that's order but that's
not a good replacement for chaos it's
just another kind of catastrophe right
too much order too much chaos both
catastrophes you want to stand in the
middle somehow and mediate between the
two and that's where you have your real
strength because then it isn't that
you've discovered a safe place because
even the bloody right Wingers are after
a safe place right they just want it to
be the state yeah exactly well there's
no safe places and the next issue is do
you really want a safe place is that
what you want you want to be so weak
that you want to be protected from
threat what the hell kind of life is
that you're a paralyzed rabbit in a hole
that's no life for a human being you
should be confronting danger and the
unknown and malevolence because and the
reason for that too is this is the weird
Paradox this is and I believe this is
the Paradox first of all that was
discovered in part by Buddha but also
laid forth very clearly in Christianity
which is that the the solution to the
problem of tragedy and malevolence is
the willingness to face them now who the
hell would ever guess that it's
completely paradoxical it's a completely
paradoxical suggestion is that well why
does it work well because the more you
confront the two of them the more you
grow and maybe you can grow so that
you're actually larger than the chaos
and malevolence itself and you think
well what's the evidence for that and
that's easy that's what people do that
is how we learn like every time you
expose your child to something new a
playground what are they exposed to
chaos and malevolence now there's more
to it than that obviously because kids
play and they you know they promote each
other and they form friendships and all
of that but in the playground itself
there is the complexity of the social
structure and the malevolence of the
bully it's right there and the you throw
your kid in there and you say adapt and
they do okay so they can do it at a a
small scale it's not trivial the
playground is a complicated place the
kid can adapt well how much can you
scale that up can you scale that up to
from the Chaos and Order and malevolence
of the playground to Chaos and Order and
malevolence itself well that's the
question well I don't think there's any
reason to answer that in the negative so
because we don't know the full extent of
a human being and it is the problem
that's worked out so in the Buddha story
for example what happens after so
Buddha's world collapses in the same way
that Adam and Eve's world collapses it's
a consequence of repetitive exposure to
mortality and death what happens to
Buddha is he realizes that the little
prote Ed City that his father made for
him the Walled Garden it's exactly the
same Motif that's in this Adam and Eve
story is is it's it's what it's it's
fatally
flawed that kind of protection cannot
exist and he he discovers that in pieces
right which is exactly what happens to
Children is that they go out they
discover a limit they run back and the
parents can help them with the limit
they run out they discover a limit they
run back but some at some point they run
out they discover limit they run back
and the parents have nothing to say to
them because they've hit the same limit
that the parents hit which is like well
what are you going to do with your life
how are you going to how are you going
to operate in this archetypal Universe
well your parents can only say well they
can say you identify with the proper
archetypal figures they do that they at
least act that out for you but at some
point it's a problem that they cannot
solve for you without making you weaker
that's the thing you know so it's an
interesting thing that I've learned in
therapy cu one of the things you have to
learn as a therapist is how do you not
take your client's problems home with
you it's a very common existential
problem that beginning therapists face
because they're afraid it's like while
you're dealing with people all the time
who have serious problems sometimes it's
mental illness although less frequently
than you'd think and sometimes it's just
that they're having a good catastrophe
right their their parents have cancer or
something like that or their father has
Alzheimer's and they're unemployed or
they have a drug problem or they have an
a schizophrenic son or like these aren't
mental illness problems right those are
just catastrophes and so people are
discussing those with you all the time
how do you avoid being crushed by that
or avoid taking it home and the answer
to that is you don't steal the problem
that that's the answer it's like you
have some problems if you come and talk
to me I'll help you figure out how to
solve them I will not tell you how to
solve them I won't steal your problems
because what we're trying to do in
therapy is number one solve your problem
number two turn you into a great solver
of problems and the second one is way
more important than the first one and so
you never solve someone's Problem by
removing from them the opportunity to
solve their problem that's theft that's
the edle situation that's the edle
situation that's the overprotective
mother now father can play that role too
we're talking about archetypal
representations it's like I'll protect
you at the cost of your ability to
protect
yourself no wrong that's the that's a
sin that's a good way of thinking about
it that is not what you do with people
not with your children not with your
partner not with yourself you don't do
that that destroys people's adaptive
competence and it and it disarms them in
the face of chaos and malevolence and
that's a terrible you're going to send
someone out unarmed in a world like that
it's a terrible thing to do so and if
people aren't strong enough to manage it
then they get resentful and then you
know you get the downhill spiral that
goes along with that okay so the meta
story is
partly you're in a map you're you have a
map but it's insufficient and things
will come up to disrupt it and sometimes
the disruption is catastrophic
everything falls apart that's what
happens to the Buddha and that's what
happens to Adam and Eve and the rest of
the biblical stories are actually an
attempt to put that back together now
that that that's been assembled as I
said it's been assembled over centuries
right okay we've got the problem the
problem is the ocp the everpresent
reality of the apocalyptic fall that's
the problem and so you could say well
what is that it's the insufficiency of
all potential conceptual
schemes right your conceptual schemes
are insufficient to deal with the
complexity of the world it's a permanent
problem so what do you do you stop
relying on your conceptual schemes
that's part of the answer you start
relying on your instead on your ability
to actively generate conceptual schemes
in the face of chaos and malevolence and
so that makes you someone that
identifies with your creative capacity
your creative courageous capacity for
articulation and action in the face of
the unknown rather than some formulaic
approach to the territory and that and
that the idea is that that elevates your
character to the point where you can
withstand tragedy and malevolence
without becoming corrupt and that
provides a permanent solution to the
problem while then you might say
cynically what's your evidence that
that's a permanent solution and the
answer to that is well the evidence
isn't all in yet first of all because
people only live that way partially and
so we haven't put the hypothesis to the
full test and second we don't know what
our limitations are we have no idea what
our limitations are and they're they're
both greater and lesser than we imagined
because you you know you have to ask
yourself like if people stopped adding
voluntarily to the misery of the world
and devoted themselves to setting things
straight setting themselves straight and
setting the things around them straight
what would happen and the answer to that
is well there'd be a hell of a lot less
unnecessary misery in the world so that
might not be a bad place to start but
apart from that there's very little that
we can say could we overcome the
catastrophe of mortality why not you
think that's beyond our capacity could
we make the world a place where no one
was suffering any more than necessary
and still allow the world exist well
possibly because we don't know the
limitations of our capacity we're only
running at 40% if that I would say we
don't make full use of all the people
that are in the world we don't have our
situation set up so that the gifts that
they could offer to everyone are fully
realized we haven't set the systems up
for that yet so we waste people like mad
and then we waste ourselves like mad and
so I would
say this is something also that's one of
the the things that's really interesting
about the Old Testament Jews this is I
think one of the reasons that their book
has become so Central is because what
happens in the Old
Testament after the fall is that Israel
produces a series of states right rise
of state and then a fall and then a rise
of another state and then a fall so it's
the same thing except it's happening at
a political level the political State
Rises it gets corrupt it falls it rises
out of the ashes again gets corrupt and
Falls I think that happened six times in
the Old Testament and one of the things
is that's very interesting is the
reaction of the Jews they always say it
was our fault instead of taking the can
enable route so and I'm going to tell
you the can and story right away instead
of taking the can and Route they always
say if the state collapsed it was
because we did something wrong that's
very different than saying you know it's
arbitrary fate it's the nature of
arbitrary fate or the structure of
reality that we're doomed to collapse
into chaos and that's an indication of
the corruption of being well you can
take that route if you want it's the
corruption of being well good luck with
that so what are you going to do about
that that's easy start you'll start to
work for the destruction of being that's
what you will do the alternative is to
say this terrible thing happened and
somehow it's my fault well at least that
LE opens you up the pathway to doing
something about it and maybe it's
actually the case maybe terrible things
happen because you're just not who you
should be at least it's a you know
that's true to some degree right you
know it because things happen to you all
the time and you think well you know if
I just would have played that game
straight and if I would have put this
thing in order that wouldn't have
happened it's like okay fine what's the
ultimate extent of that doeski said at
one point that every human being was not
only responsible for everything that
happened to him or her but also
simultaneously responsible for
everything that happened to everyone
else now it's a very it's a I would say
it's almost a hallucinogenic idea right
it's a it's a Transcendent idea and it
can go very wrong sometimes depressed
people for example get hyper responsible
for what's happened and just crushes
them and so it's it's a it's a mode of
thinking that can produce its attendant
pathologies but there's something about
it
that's there's something about it that's
metaphysically true so all right so I'm
going to tell you the story of Kan and
Abel now I really like this story it's
it's it's very short it's only about a
paragraph long which is very interesting
cuz it it's one of these examples where
there's an it's like a genie the story
there's so much condensed into it that
it's almost unbelievable and there's
even ambiguity condensed into it which
is which is very very interesting
because it actually makes the story more
complex and sophisticated so let me tell
you the story now the first thing I want
to tell you some things about the story
first so we've got the original
paradisal state and then the collapse
and so now metaphysically speaking we're
we're in the collapse we're in the we're
in the postf fall condition we're still
occupying a mythological landscape right
this isn't history as we normally
understand it it's metahistory so when
we talk about Cain and AEL Cain and Abel
we're actually talking about the first
two real human beings because Adam and
Eve a were created by God and B were in
paradise and so that's not the normative
condition of human beings right that's a
that's a special time that's outside of
normal time and space Cana and Abel by
contrast there in history because in
some sense history actually starts a
couple of times in the Old Testament
right it starts with the creation of
being it starts with the formation of
the garden it starts with the fall it
starts with Cain and Abel it starts over
again with Noah and then it starts with
Abraham which is really where what we
would recognize more as conventional
history begins so there's a number of
starts of history but this is one of
them Cain and Abel are the first two
human beings who are they they're the
adversarial Brothers hero and adversary
they're types of Christ and Satan it's a
well-known supposition you see that
hostile brother Motif well it's an
archetypal Motif and the Hostile
brothers are the part of you that's
striving for the light that's one half
and the part of you that's embracing the
darkness and so that's part of you it's
part of the social structure that's Seth
and Osiris it's part of the natural
order in some sense that's the
benevolent and destructive ele elements
of of nature right you see that
negativity running through all the
archetypal representations but Cain and
Abel are the Hostile brothers and the K
can is roughly that part of you that
says oh to hell with it and means it
right and that means you'll work for
your own pain and destruction at the
same time that you're working for the
pain and destruction not only of your
brother but all but more particularly of
the brother that you admire because
that's actually a lot more entertaining
right if you're
become destructive and you go destroy
something bad that hardly qualifies as
destruction what you want to do is find
something great and destroy that that's
destruction that's Revenge none of this
putting punishment where it deserves to
be what you want to do and this is
partly why the story of Christ is
archetypal and an archetypal story is
when you cannot push Beyond what's the
worst possible punishment what's the
worst possible punishment Meed out for
the
least the least the most innocent person
you hit an archetypal end there so you
define most innocent person you can do
that any way you want Define most
innocent person Define worst possible
punishment conjoin the two things you
get an archetypal story and the reason
for that is you can't push Beyond it and
so if you want to destroy something you
want to destroy an ideal not something
that's flawed and so C and able are set
up exactly that way so I'll read you the
story and I'll inter leave some
interpretations along with it so and
Adam knew Eve his wife and she conceived
and bore Cain and said I have got a man
from the Lord and she again bear his
brother Abel and Abel was a keeper of
sheep but Cain was a tiller of the
ground okay so Abel's a shepherd and
Cain is a
farmer the shepherd is an archetypal
symbol because the shepherd is the
leader of a flock and the shepherd is
the heroic leader of a flock and the
reason this is Middle Eastern mythology
let's say well if you were a Shepherd
what did you do you took your slingshot
and your stick and you defended your
nice juicy plump delicious sheep against
Lions right so it was no joke man you
you were a tough cookie if you were a
Shepherd because well you were acting as
the guardian of of you were acting as
the guardian against predation roughly
speaking and you weren't armed very well
I mean well you can just think about it
for a minute it's to to think about
fighting off a lion with a with a
slingshot or with a bow and arrow or
with a spear I mean you have to have a
lot of courage to manage that especially
successfully so Abel was a keeper of
sheep and Cain was a tiller of the
ground which isn't as heroic a role and
so right off the bat you get this
dichotomy between the two roles it's
also of great interest that Cain is the
older brother and Abel is the younger
brother and you see that very frequently
in mythology because the older brother
is the one that's privileged by status
right so he's got he's got privilege
Cain because he's the elder brother that
also means that if there are possessions
to be handed down the generations the
older brother gets them now
interestingly enough Cain has privilege
but he's not the one that's favored by
God that and I think that's absolutely
it's absolutely brilliant that it's set
up that way because it's actually Abel
who doesn't have the right that the
firstborn has who actually turns into
the person who's the proper
manifestation of the ideal it's because
Cain has things given to him you might
think well that that's great he's
privileged what a wonderful thing for
Cain it's like don't be so sure about
that and partly because one of the
things that you'll find because many of
you will be well off when you have
children is one of the problems with
being reasonably wealthy when you have
children is that you deprive them of
privation because a lot of what makes
people mature is necessity and if you
have for example if you have more money
than you know what to do with roughly
speaking it's very difficult to say no
to your children when they want
something because why are you going to
say no you can just provide it well what
makes you think that that's what you
should do well you can have anything you
want well what happens you devalue what
you want and your desires continue to
grow well that's not very helpful so
it's not obvious at all that providing
people with an excess let's say of
privilege is something that's good for
them from a psychological perspective
they need to hit the proper for
limitations and if
you're uh fortunate it becomes very
difficult to deprive your children
properly so you'll you'll fight with
that it's a big problem and that's what
happens when you get spoiled children
roughly speaking right they get every
they get everything by doing nothing
well that's not a good lesson because
that won't work in the world it'll work
very
counterproductively and in process of
time it came to pass that Cain brought
of the fruit of the ground an offering
unto the Lord and Abel he also brought
of the firstlings of his flock and of
the fat thereof and the Lord had respect
unto Abel and his offering but unto Cain
and his offering he had no respect and
Cain was very wroth angry and his
countenance fell okay so again there's a
tremendous amount packed into that this
is the first time that we see the motif
of sacrifice right and so I mentioned to
you before how these archaic people
conceptualize the world right it's a
dome with uh a disc of land and
underneath that a disc of water fresh
and underneath that a disc of salt water
so that's the world and then up in the
heavens that's where God is and so God's
up in the sky and we talked about why
that might be and part of that is well
when you look at the night sky you look
at what transcends your current reality
and you look at what inspires awe so
there's a God exists where awe is
experienced fine that's a perfectly
reasonable that's a perfectly reasonable
hypoth IIs when you think that what
you're trying to do is formulate what
constitutes the Transcendent because if
you exist within a conceptual structure
and you encounter that which is outside
the conceptual structure you will feel
awe that's a combination of fear
paralysis right and a combination of
overwhelming possibility and you can
experience that for example if you
listen to a great piece of music what
happens the hair on the back of your
neck stands up why because you're a prey
animal and you just puffed up to look
bigger that's why you have that
experience it's pyo erection and it's
part of awe so when you see a cat puff
up because a big dog is in front of it
that's what the cat's feeling it's like
oh my God puff right so you when you
encounter that which transcends your
your limited sphere of apprehension then
you experience awe you look at the night
sky that's what happens music can do
that and all sorts of things that we do
can evoke that sense and so they located
the the Transcendent value that which
inspired awe fine reasonable now you can
argue about the utility of the
personification right because God the
father was personified in human form but
that's a very sophisticated idea too
because as we already found in the Old
Testament there's an there's an
association between whatever God is
yahwah or Elohim and and creating order
out of chaos and something about each
individual human being and so I don't
believe that the personification of God
the father in the Old Testament is
archaic and and primitive at all I think
it's one of the most sophisticated
things that people ever developed the
idea is that the ultimate Transcendent
value is the capacity to generate order
out of chaos using linguistic ability
let's say and that each person has that
as an essential element of their being
it's like argue with that see how far
you get that is one hell of a vicious
conceptualization and I would also say
it's the Bedrock upon which our legal
system rests
so you you don't move that easily you
move that and Many Things fall and there
are things that you may say you don't
believe but you act them out all the
time in fact if you didn't act them out
people would set you straight very very
rapidly because basically what other
people want from you even though they
don't conceptualize it in this terms is
that you Accord them the respect due the
the Incarnation of the logos that's
exactly what it means to interact with
someone properly so it's you can say
what you want about what you believe it
doesn't matter what matters is what you
act
out all right so Al so now we have this
conceptualization of what's Transcendent
that's emerged as a part partially
perhaps as emotional contagion that
which inspires awe is that which is
transcendent and it's associated with
these underlying ideas about the
creation of order out of chaos and the
instantiation of that spirit in human
beings that's all lurking in the
background and then we have this other
idea which we already talked about which
is that there's a patriarchal or
paternal spirit that represents the
community at large stretched across time
you can think about that as the spirit
of the ancestors so it's the past it's
the present but that's also projected
into the future that's the thing you
bargain with for your life in the future
I'm going to sacrifice myself to get a
degree why is that because the spirit of
my culture will reward me in the future
that's the sacrifice okay well it took
people a we were chimpanzees for God's
sake it took us a long time to figure
this out chimpanzees don't sacrifice the
present for the future you know you got
to ask yourself how long did it take
human beings to figure out that there
was a future and then what to do about
it I mean this isn't something we didn't
go from chimpanzee to fully articulated
human being in one in one step it was
created knowledge in that was
extraordinarily painful what did we
learn from observation something like
storing up Goods for the future helps us
live you imagine how difficult that is
you know imagine that you're you're a
farmer back when when that was an
extraordinar uh you were barely scraping
out a living doing that it was hand to
mouth at best all right so now it's
winter and you've got your damn seeds in
your Cellar right what are you going to
do you're starving you going to eat them
or you going to wait and plant them
again in the spring cuz that's your damn
choice and so the people who decided to
eat
them well some of the people who decided
to save them died well let say more of
the people who decided to eat them died
and so this sort of knowledge was was
gathered in in in unbelievable Agony you
don't get what what you have what you
want right now for you that's nothing
because you're very much accustomed to
getting what you want all the time right
now roughly speaking you know compared
to people who live from hand to mouth
but back when things were much rougher
the idea that you had to sacrifice
something of value now to be paid off in
the future man that was a rough thing to
accept Okay so what happened so people
figured this out somehow they figured
out that you could make an offering of
something you valued and that might help
set the world straight how did they
conceptualize that well they
conceptualized it ritually they were
acting it out to begin with it's like
the pedian idea you know when I when I
look at that cup part of the looking is
this right it's the adjustment of my
body to the shape of the cup that's part
of my understanding well P's
P one of PJ's great observations is that
we use our bodies to represent things
long before we understand what it is
that we're representing which is to say
no more than we act things out we're
dramatic creatures right we use drama
and the the sacrificial ritual is a
drama that points to a higher
psychological truth and the higher
psychological truth is let go of what's
in let go of what you value now and
perhaps that will pay off multi manifold
in the future you're making a bargain
and then you might say well who are you
making a bargain with and you could say
well nature but that's not exactly right
it's not exactly right
because let's say I have something of
value in a social in a social
organization and I'm going to I'm I'm
going to let it go because I'm I'm
relying on a corresponding reward or a
greater reward in the future it's a
contractual relationship with other
people it's not a relationship with
nature it's the we've organized
ourselves into a social structure and
we're willing to maintain the Integrity
of the social structure across time so
that if I give up something now I can be
paid for it in the future and the rule
the deal is the we're going to try to
keep the future the same as the present
so that those contracts can be can be
met in the future that's money that's
what money is right here's some money
you made a sacrifice that's where you
get the money what does the money
signify it's a
from the
community that the labor that you
invested can be stored and
then brought forward for your own
purposes in the future so it's actually
part of the social contract so the thing
you're sacrificing to is the spirit of
society that produces the social
contract and so that's conceptualized as
God the Father well how else would you
conceptualize it it's it's the spirit of
the dominance hierarchy that's the right
way to think about it so it's the it's
what's common across all the members of
the dominance hierarchy across time well
something you can negotiate with true or
not what the hell do you think you're
doing when you make a
contract what's the law it's all of this
it's the manifestation of that
patriarchal Spirit across time and space
and what do you do you sacrifice to it
well so back 4,000 years ago 5,000 years
ago however old this story is it's
probably older than that this is the
best people could do with regards
realization and they got it quite right
because they also noted that God was
happier if you actually sacrificed
something of value and so there's a
tremendous complexity in that idea
because one of the things I could say
and this is something Yung pointed out
let's say you're miserable and unhappy
okay here's a
cure find what's valuable and let it go
so we could say well maybe it's a
relationship that you have maybe it's a
relationship with your parents right and
the relationship is pathological but
you're locked into it you value it and
no wonder because it's a relationship
with your parents and you're suffering
terribly because of it well what do you
do maybe you let it go it's a sacrifice
and the idea is that well that'll clear
the future for you well very frequently
when people are suffering terribly not
always because sometimes you just suffer
stupidly blindly and without recourse
you know you get cancer and then you die
so we have no idea how to deal with that
but sometimes the reason Reon that
you're suffering is because you just
won't let go of the thing that's biting
you and you think well I can't let go of
and I've had clients like this I can't
stop communicating with my mother who
phones me three times a day every day of
my life and never says anything that
isn't unbelievably critical and
demeaning I can't let that go it's
like well that's not such a good idea
the funny thing too often when people
let something like that go it goes away
sorts itself out and then comes back so
they don't even end up losing it but
unless they're willing to let it go to
sacrifice it they make no Headway
whatsoever and so one of the rules is if
people are impeding your development you
sacrifice your relationship with them
right it's a very very rough rule
so in process of time it came to pass
that Cain brought of the fruit of the
ground an offering unto the Lord and
Abel he also brought of the firstlings
of his flock and of the fat thereof now
that's interesting e this is this is
where a close reading matters so we
don't know what Cain's offering is it's
not much described but we do know
something about Abel's offering and what
we know is that by the standards of the
time it's a high quality offering so
it's the firstborn and it's the fat that
high calorie right I mean you know we
think of fat as a dietary danger but if
you're hungry that's really wrong right
because fat is unbelievably high calorie
and so what's happening is the story
points out quite clearly that what Abel
decides to offer to God is of high
quality so it's the real thing it's the
real thing he he's he's paying a price
okay and so then it's burned well why is
it burned well you know this is back
again thinking from an archaic
perspective well God's in the sky you
can't throw your lamb up into the sky
it'll just fall back down and so but
people knew because they'd mastered fire
that smoke and Savor Rose and so you
could detect the quality of an offering
as a consequence of burning and then
that would go up in the spirit of the
fire would go up to the sky and God
could detect whether or not your
offering was of reasonable quality you
know it's concretized obviously but you
don't want to make the assumption that
the people who were our forbears were
stupid just because they thought using
metaphors that aren't the same as our
metaphors they were still mapping out
the damn territory you know and and and
you look you can read a book like you're
above the authors of the book or you can
read a book as if it might have
something to teach you
and I would say well sometimes the book
isn't worth reading but if a book has
been around for a very long period of
time and a very large number of people
have thought that perhaps there's
something in it sometimes they're right
so and it's a tricky thing and it might
also depend on how you read it but I
found that this sort of Investigation
was a lot more useful if I started from
the presupposition that maybe there was
something I didn't know instead of you
know so funny for example I I taught a
first year course about 10 years ago on
the psychology of religion and it was so
interesting dealing with the 18-year-old
students because they were completely
dismissive of religious ideas and I
thought God you guys you don't know
anything and you have this specific kind
of blindness that a a set of very
intelligent social psychologists also
identified which was blindness blindness
because it actually turns out that the
least the less you know about a topic
the more you overestimate the quality of
your knowledge and so I thought we're in
this situation where kids who who don't
even know how to act in the world they
don't know anything will come to
University and start off with the
proposition that they're astute critics
of judeo-christian culture which of
which they know nothing they know
nothing about it they know nothing about
history they know nothing about
philosophy nothing about literature but
they're absolutely certain that they're
correct in their in the criticisms that
they're bringing forth it's absolutely
unbelievable so anyways and it's not
helpful because then you don't you don't
get to learn and you want well you know
what happens if you don't learn okay so
anyway so it looks like Abel's doing a
good job that's the implication the
story doesn't say Abel is doing a really
good job with his sacrifices it just
hints at it and I like that because
because it leaves that ambiguity it's
like maybe you're working really hard
and your brother's working really hard
and you really can't tell the difference
between your quality of work and his
quality of work but for some reason he's
succeeding like mad that happens right
because there's an arbitrary element to
life and so the story says well the Lord
has respect unto Abel in his offering
and there's an implication that maybe
the reason for that is that you know
Cain's offerings are a little second
rate but the story doesn't come over out
and Club you over the head with that
idea it just leaves it as a as an
ambiguous possibility and the reason for
that is sometimes you make sacrifices
and maybe they're even real ones and
they don't pay off or they pay off for
someone better and so there is this
arbitrary nature of the the Transcendent
that you're attempting to deal with it
rewards and doesn't reward more or less
of its own accord there's an element of
that and so it's ambiguous in the text
even though there's a hint that you know
perhaps Abel is doing a better job than
Cain so I like that I think it's very
sophisticated so what happens well Cain
makes his offerings and God isn't happy
with them now we don't know how Cain
figures out that God isn't happy with
his offerings we get some hints of that
too but the story does tell us that's
what happens and so then we get the
psychological response on the part of
Cain now one response could be Jesus I
must be doing something wrong I better
straighten myself out you know I better
come up with a better quality offering
and try that again that isn't what
happens what happens instead is that
Cain becomes angry wroth and his
countenance Falls and so what does that
mean it means this right it means he is
is not happy he's angry and out for
revenge and so one of the I've been
thinking about this a lot lately with
regards to the literature on inequality
because there's a very good literature
that shows for example that there's a
there's a there's a measure called the
jny coefficient and the jinny
coefficient is a numerical index of the
relative inequality of a geographical
local so for example if you went to
newfinland where everyone is roughly not
very rich or North Dakota say almost
everyone there is say lower middle class
something like that or upper working
class something like that very little
variability low Genie coefficient okay
and if you go to Miami Beach say where
everyone's Rich low Genny coefficient
because it isn't an index of absolute
wealth or absolute poverty it's an index
of relative poverty and so if everyone's
Rich the relative poverty is low and if
everyone's poor the relative poverty is
low now one question
is where's the crime and you might think
well the crime is
the absolute poverty is high right or
the absolute wealth is low that's where
the crime is that's
wrong if it's if things are relatively
distributed in an egalitarian manner the
male on male crime especially homicide
is low and it's also the case where
everyone is Rich but if you go into
places where there's some rich people
but not very many and there's a lot of
people who are comparatively poor than
the male homicide rapes rates and
violent crime rates amp up substantially
and it's a consequence of maleon male
competition and so what you could derive
from that and maybe even reasonably is
that you should flatten out the damn
income into distribution because you're
destabilizing the society by
facilitating male criminal aggression
you can make a good case for that you
know in in places like Colombia where
the Genny coefficient got unbelievably
extreme Society got so violent that it
could barely hold itself together so so
you you can make a conservative argument
for redistribution of income using the
observation that if the income
distribution gets to extreme the whole
bloody thing starts to destabilize and
might fall but but then you also might
say wait a minute is it inequality
that's driving the
violence or is it resentment of the
inequality that's driving the violence
now that's a tough question because you
might say well what if the game is
rigged and there's no way of moving up
the power hierarchy well then maybe
anger and and the desire for revolution
is the appropriate response but that
doesn't really mean to me that the
response should be the sort of thing
that you see in high gen coefficient
neighborhoods which is interracial intra
racial violence between men so for
example in neighborhoods where there's
High murder rates the the murders are
always between young men and they're
always within race and so that doesn't
seem to me to be exactly a politically
revolutionary move right it's more like
it's more like uh violent competition
for the sake of of of attaining status
and you might say well that's reasonable
but because the inequality is there and
men need to find status because it's
part of what drives them forward it's
part of what makes them attractive to
women it's a necessity well the question
is do you attain status through
destruction or do you start making your
offerings putting your offerings in
order and that's something we really
need to figure out because that's a
fundamental political question it's a
fundamental political question anyways
what happens in this story is that Cain
decides that the fact that God isn't
accepting his offerings means that he's
entitled to become angry and and and
negative those two things are both put
together right he's wroth he's angry and
he's also depressed and so he's in a
state of mind that well I think the best
characterization for that is hostile
resentment because it's unfair it's like
yeah it's unfair so what are you going
to do about it you going to get
destructive about it you're going to
change your approach well Cain he does
the ultimate thing and this is what
people do when they do the ultim thing
because that kind of hostile resentment
has an archetypal end point and the
archetypal end point is the point that
you get when you're hostile and
resentful because you haven't been
successful and then you go sit in your
mother's basement for about 10 years and
then you start imagining just how nice
it would be if you shot up the local
high school so that everybody knew your
name and what happens is you go from I'm
irritated because things aren't working
out for me very well two I'm irritated
and I hate those people for whom things
are working out well two I irritated and
I hate the fact that the world is set up
so that this has happened to me and then
you go to well because I'm irritated and
hate the world I'm going to do whatever
I can that will destroy it most rapidly
and with the with the highest possible
amount of pain and suffering conceivable
and at that point then you don't just go
shoot up the high school you go up and
shoot up the elementary school and so if
you're wondering what kind of pathway
people walk down to get to that point
that's the pathway and the ultimate cap
of that is well I'll I'll I'll I'll kill
the kids because well we already know
that killing the innocent is a lot more
effective than killing the guilty and
then just to cap it off I'll blow my
head off at the end just to show you
just how godamn pointless it all is and
so that's the logical extension of
Cain's attitude and you might think well
that's a bit of an over reading and I
will say it's not an over reading at all
it's exactly what happens in the text so
it's it's exactly what follows it so
fine so Cain is not happy and so who's
he not happy with
well he's not happy with God and so so
what does that mean well we've already
unpacked this he's not happy with the
social contract cuz that's part of the
spirit the patriarchal Spirit let's say
then there's more to it than that
because we already we've already
analyzed what God the idea of God might
represent in the background of this
story he's not happy with the
Transcendent he's not happy with the
idea of the logos all of that no faith
in the
Transcendent nothing but he he does
nothing but despise the social contract
and he's got no faith whatsoever ever in
the the logos let's say the word that
brings chaos out of order he's all got
nothing but contempt for all of that and
you know certainly you know people like
that and if you don't know them you just
go on YouTube and read the comments and
you'll see all sorts of people like that
so so anyway so God has a little chat
with him and he says well what why are
you angry and and why why are you upset
and Cain says and God says if you do
well won't you be accepted and if you
don't do well sin lies at your door and
unto thee shall be his desire and thou
shalt rule over him okay that's a very
mangled translation I would say so I'm
going to take it apart so what God says
is well you're angry and you're upset
it's like well what's your problem and
then God tells Cain if you did things
properly they would work out for you
well it's the last thing he wants to
hear because what Cain wants to believe
is that the reason he's not doing very
well is because there's no sense having
any faith in the L goes the Transcendent
is is evil and aimed exactly against him
and the entire social contract is faulty
that's what he wants to hear but that
isn't what God says God says wait a
minute maybe you're doing something
wrong
well that's maybe a worse message than
everything else is corrupt it's like
you're having a problem because you're
just not everything you could be well
and then God says something really nasty
and you can't tell from this lines I
read a bunch of translations to try to
figure out exactly what it meant so this
is what God tells Cain he
says you're in a room in a house and
there's something at the door and he
uses a metaphor God uses a metaphor it's
a sexually aroused predatory cat and you
invite it in you invite it in you know
that it has evil intent you invite it in
to mate with you right and you it's it's
Union with you this this malevolent
Force this it's sexual Union with you
has produced an offspring and that
Offspring is what possesses you and so
not only have you done something wrong
you've you've invited the spirit of
wrongdoing into your life and you've
creatively intermingled it with it
voluntarily to bring forth a monster of
your own creation so that's what God
tells Cain it's
like look it's bad enough that God says
you know you should get your act
together because maybe that's why things
aren't going so well for you before you
criticize the Transcendent and the world
and the structure of being maybe you're
doing something wrong but it's worse
than that he says not only are you doing
something wrong you bloody well know
you're doing something wrong and you and
you're doing it creatively and with
intent so not only are things not going
well for you but you've played a
creative role in producing that
situation and so God basically says I am
taking zero responsibility for rejecting
your sacrifice it's all on you and so
Cain leaves and he's like seriously not
happy with that response because he
wanted to hear pat pat you're a victim
of circumstance and everything's
conspiring against you and really being
God I should get my act together and
just give you what you want because
obviously being God I'm wrong and you're
right well that isn't what happens it's
exactly the opposite of that it's
completely on you that's the that's the
judgment and so Caine leaves and believe
me he's he was wroth before and his
countenance had fallen before but it's
nothing like it is now and so he's hits
the next stage and he thinks
okay I'm going to take my revenge what
am I going to do I'm going to find the
most innocent and worthwhile thing
that's favorite of God and I'm going to
kill it and that's what he does so and
it doesn't matter that's his brother and
Abel you know we're drawing the
inference Abel's done the right things
Everyone likes him everything's
flourishing for Abel he's a good guy
he's one of those people that you meet
that has everything and then you meet
them and you wish you could hate them
but you can't because they're really
people and then you really hate them
because not only do they have everything
but it appears that they deserve it and
there's nothing that sort of sits in
your soul and rots it more than that
realization and so that's the situation
with Cain and so Cain thinks Cain talked
with Abel his brother and it came to
pass when they were in the field that
Cain rose up against Abel his brother
and slew him so that's so interesting
because look look what happens to Cain
here so he's not doing well he's
separated from the Transcendent and from
Society he's bitterly resentful and now
he goes out and kills the very thing
that he most wants to be so he destroys
his own ideal right he demolishes his
own ideal that's how far his resentment
has pushed him and so he's he's done
right but he doesn't matter because it
enables him to take revenge so he
doesn't care it's like it's like the the
suicidal school shooter that blows off
his head at the end of his Mayhem it's
like it doesn't matter to him it's part
of the same art
form and the Lord says unto Cain where
is Abel thy brother and Cain said I know
I don't know am I My Brother's Keeper
well that's a good question that's why
it's posed in the story because the
answer to that is supposed to be yes and
God says what have you done the voice of
your brother's blood cries unto me from
the
ground that's actually the motif that
dovi explores I would say in crime and
punishment because what happens is that
Ral nikov is Cain for all intents and
purposes and he commits a murder but he
gets away with it well so he thinks so
he thinks no one suspects him he buries
the money he can't stand to touch the
body he buries it in a in a abandoned
lot and he's drawn there now and then to
look at where it is but he can't touch
it because the money it's so funny
because the money before he kills the
pawn broker is not the same as the money
after he kills the P pawn broker and the
raskolnikov before he kills the pawn
broker is not the same as the
raskolnikov after after he kills the pul
broker in fact they're not the same at
all and so rcal nikov is tormented by
God you could say but not from the
external world he sets the crime up
quite nicely it's that the the spirit
against which he transgress tortures him
from within and there's no escape from
it and So eventually what happens in
crime and punishment is rol nikov
continues to manifest himself as guilty
in every possible way until he receives
the punishment that he desires because
it's the only way that he can set things
right he actually he actually he
essentially turns himself in eventually
because he can't tolerate what he's done
so well so that's the
idea thy voice of thy brother's blood
cries unto me from the ground it's
guilt and now you're cursed from the
earth which is opened her mouth to
receive thy brother's blood from thy
hand when you till the ground it will
not henceforth yield unto you its
strength a fugitive and a vagabond shall
thou be in the earth you know and you
might say well why does God not just
strike Cain dead and the answer to that
perhaps
is that wouldn't be sufficient
punishment that's what it looks like to
me it's like what's the punishment you
live with what you
did right and I don't want anybody
taking you out either either because
then you won't have to live with what
you did so that's the punishment and
Cain says unto the Lord my punishment is
greater than I can bear it's like yeah
behold you have driven me out this day
from the face of the Earth and from thy
face shall I be hid it's the same as
what happens to Adam in the Garden of
Eden remember Adam hides from God and he
has his reasons and now Cain is
alienated from God there's no re there's
no reconstructing that relationship he's
put himself by violating his
contract let's say with the Transcendent
and also with Society and also with his
own Spirit he's put himself outside the
possibility of redemption and that's why
he says the punishment is greater than I
can bear there's no hope left right so
he's in hell for all intents and
purposes behold thou Hast driven me out
this day from the face of the Earth and
from thy face shall I be hid and I shall
be a fugative and a vagabond in the
earth and it shall come to pass that
everyone who finds me will will kill me
and God says therefore whoever slayeth
Cain Vengeance shall be taken on him
Sevenfold and the Lord set a mark onto
Cain lest any finding him should kill
him now that's interesting you think why
in the world would God protect Cain well
the next part of the story actually
tells you that you have a family I have
a family your brother kills my son so
what do I do I come and I kill your
father and your cousin and then you
think well I killed your father and your
cousin I'm going to come back and I'm
going to kill four of your people and
then I come back and say yeah no problem
it's 16 of you this time and then you
come back and you say 16 a let's try for
32 and so this is what happens this is
actually why Justice systems are set up
by the way you got there's a bunch of
reasons Justice systems are set up and
one is to punish the guilty that's one
the other is to have the guilty repent
that's two to maintain social order
that's three here's another one that no
one ever think
about back 30 years ago the governor of
Massachusetts whose name I forget was
running for president and while he was
governor of Massachusetts he had
released a number of prisoners one of
whom's name was I think Willie maybe
Horton doesn't really matter and when
Willie was released on this program he
went out and raped someone and I perhaps
killed them I can't remember but it
doesn't matter the rape is good enough
and the governor was asked during a
debate what he would do if a released
prisoner had raped his daughter or his
wife and he gave a very weak answer uh
what was his name he gave a very weak
answer of something about you know
letting the law take its due course and
that's the wrong answer right the right
answer is I would
be compelled with every fiber of my
being to hunt that person down and to
tear them into bits but I won't do
it now what so what's the purpose purp
of the justice system is to alleviate
you from the responsibility of Revenge
that's what it's for because otherwise
what
happens you kill one I kill two you kill
four I kill eight you kill 16 and soon
everyone's at War and so God protects
Cain to stop that from happening to stop
the feud from emerging because those
things can go forever and then from
transforming the entire Society into a
state of war and so what's also so I
I'll tell you the rest of the
story and Cain went out from the
presence of the Lord and dwelt in the
Land of Nod on the East of Eden and Cain
knew his wife and she conceived and bear
Enoch Etc so now you have a genealogy
right so Cain starts to have a family
you have a genealogy and so a number of
people are named in the lineage and so
and it tells you what this is sort of an
attempt to describe how things came
about so this is like the naming of the
heroes of old and so you have uh Enoch
who builds a city you have um jabel who
is the father of those who dwell in
tents and of those who have cattle um
you have jubil who is the father of of
musicians and Zilla Who Bore tubul Kan
now tubul cane is a very interesting
person by tradition tubul Kain is the
first artificer of weapons of war so
kan's
descendant after multiple Generations is
the person who produces weapons of war
all right and so so there's another bit
of the story within which that needs to
be placed in
context and
lamech who's one of the
uh grandchildren of Cain says unto his
wife wives adaa and Zillah hear my voice
ye wives of lamech hearken unto my
speech for I have slain a man to my
wounding and a young man to my hurt okay
so what he's saying is he
he's been involved in a
murder if Cain be Avenged Sevenfold
truly lch 70 and Sevenfold and so
there's the implication there
that the tit fortat process has begun
Cain kills Abel Abel Cain's children
kill seven Cain's grandchildren kill 70
fold and then tubalcain pops up on the
horizon and he's the person who makes
artifices of war and so the story in its
fragmentary manner ties the individual
Psychopathology that's resentful and
revenge seeking to the proclivity for
broadscale Warfare and this really hit
me because I was interested particularly
in what was happening in the Nazi camps
with the
guards because the guards were
gratuitously cruel and I was very
curious about that and so here's an
interesting story this was in a book
called uh ordinary Germans Hitler's
willing executioners and it was a book
that was written about 30 years ago that
challenged the idea that the Nazi
phenomena was top down order following
which I don't believe by the way I think
that that's a very uh weak weak
hypothesis fascistic societies are
fascistic at every single level of
organization spiritually within the
family within the local community it's
like a holograph it's the same
absolutely everywhere it's not topped
down I mean there are leaders who get
produced and maybe they catalyze it but
to blame it on the leaders is to
forget about the process by which the
leaders come to be so no you don't get a
pass that way so here's one of the
things that
happened um as the Nazis started to lose
the war so here's what you should have
done if you were a Nazi and you wanted
to win the war you should have Enslaved
the Jews and the Gypsies and had them
work right you had should have had them
work for the benefit of the Victory and
then if you wanted to liquidate them
afterwards that's the logical thing to
do if you want to win and we assume that
Hitler wanted to win but that's not a
very intelligent assumption why would
you assume that he wasn't exactly a good
guy so why should we assume that he was
aiming at the good that he was promoting
even in his own terms right the Glorious
Everlasting fourth Third Reich right
that'll rule for a thousand years and be
a a Bastion of civilization and music
because that's the sort of thing he
purported to be interested in well so
what do you do with the Jews and the
gypsies well round them up fine enslave
them fine you don't kill them you
certainly don't devote a substantial
proportion of your War resources while
you're losing to accelerate the rate at
which the extermination is taking place
because that's a bit counterproductive
unless what you're aiming at is the
maximum possible Mayhem in the shortest
period of time well so what happened as
the Germans started to lose the war did
Hitler lose faith in his own ability no
he believed that the Germans had
betrayed him with weakness and so he was
perfectly willing to accelerate the rate
at which Germany was losing the war and
so when Hitler and his minions had the
choice here's the choice you can suspend
your unnecessary demolition of people
win the damn war and then pick it up
afterwards or while you're losing you
can just accelerate the Mayhem even
though it's counterproductive it's like
what' they pick well they pick to
accelerate the Mayhem and so to me
there's an old psychoanalytic idea I
think this was derived by
Yung if you can't figure out what
someone is doing or why look at the out
and infer the
motivation if it produces
Mayhem perhaps it was aiming at mayem
now you know you have to use that dictum
carefully if someone's irritating you
you know maybe it's because you're
irritable and you should sort yourself
out but maybe it's because they're
actually aiming at irritating you and
that's the actual motivation so perhaps
not but it's another tool in your
analytical Armament
so and so you see well this is the the
thing about warfare that's so
interesting about about because you you
can you can attribute it to
territoriality you can attribute it to a
war for resources that's what the I
would say
wretchedly
simple-minded economists presume people
fight over scarce resources it's like
hey we're a little bit more
sophisticated than that and first of all
what resources are you talking about the
bloody Inuit had nothing they live
perfect ly well what did they have snow
and seal blubber you know people can
live in unbelievably deprived conditions
and so the idea that there are natural
resources that we fight over because
there's a shortage of them is a pretty
oversimplified view of human beings it's
like well why do people fight well maybe
they fight sometimes for good reasons
but very very frequently they fight for
bad reasons and those bad reasons are
are personal as well as sociocultural
and economic you know if you were a Nazi
prison guard for example whatever
pathologies you were carrying around in
your destructive little soul whatever
element of Cain was deeply embedded in
you had the opportunity to be manifest
fully at every moment of your waking
existence right you had these people who
were completely beholden to you with no
rights whatsoever to whom you could do
whatever your evil little heart
determined think well maybe that was a
motivation for putting them there to
begin with and all the cover story about
well we're trying to build the Third
Reich and we're trying to stabilize the
state and we're trying to do all these
good things maybe that's just a cover
story for the real motivation which is
nothing but but what the construction of
death camps that killed 6 million people
how about that and the obliteration of
120 million people on the planet and the
and the and the and the leaving of
Europe in runes maybe that was the
motivation or are we going to attribute
to Hitler the highest possible motives
say no it's an archetypal manifestation
of Cain now he's going to put up a front
that says well I'm your savior it's like
well destructive people think that Cain
is their savior
let's take a break for 15 minutes so
okay
so the next thing that
happens these stories were sewed
together right to make something that
resembles a coherent text and there's
this literary
analytic no there's a literary technique
known as omy and matomy is the
juxtaposition of two things beside one
another with the implication that
because they're juxtaposed they are
causely they're related in some
important manner to one another and so
the stories are sequenced and the
there's an
implicit the stories are sequenced in a
particular Manner and you might operate
under the assumption that that
sequencing occurred because the
sequencer who was an editor or group of
editors they call that person the
redactor but they have no idea if it was
one person or many people who organized
these texts into something resembling a
coherent story so imagine the stories
evolved somewhat independently and then
they were organized so that they
produced what approximated a coherent
narrative it's not entirely coherent
because there are paradoxical claims say
at the level of the sentence so for
example the creation order in the first
story in Genesis isn't exactly the same
as the creation order in the second
story and you know people who insist
upon the literal truth of the Bible
whatever that means is are bothered by
those contradictions and turn themselves
into knots trying to iron them out and
fair enough right because you want the
story to be be coherent but you know
that's sort
of it's important but it's also beside
the point you don't want to focus on one
level of analysis at the exclusion of
all the other levels of analysis that's
probably the right way to think about it
now the fact that these stories are
sequenced in a particular Manner and
that that kind of makes sense implies
that there's some sort of narrative
coherence underneath driving them
forward um otherwise they would be
nothing but a random assemblage of
stories and they're by no means random
that's for sure they're selected and
edited and put together in a particular
manner by and then stored that way and
dealt with in a particular manner by
thousands of people over many many
years what happens after Canan abble is
well there's an interlude which is this
interlude um and it it's kind of a
bridge and and there's a lot packed into
it too although I'm not going to take it
apart very much it says so this is after
after the Canaan abble story and it came
to pass when men began to multiply on
the face of the Earth that and daughters
were born unto them that the sons of God
saw the daughters of men that they were
fair and then took them wives of all
which they
chose and there were giants in the earth
in those days and also after that when
the sons of God came into the daughters
of men and they bear children to them
the same became Mighty Men which are of
old men of renown Okay so I already
pointed out that if you go back just a
little bit you see that the descendants
of Cain are represented as founders of
of Institutions right um there
are Enoch who builds a city and uh and
Ada or jabal who is the father of those
who dwell in tents and of those who own
cattle and then there's jubel who's the
father of all that are musician and so
on so one of the things that you see in
in myths very frequently is that if
there's a pattern of behavior that's
characteristic of the culture that
pattern of behavior is attributed to a
hero who was in The Past who was the
first person who did that and so you
might say well what does that mean well
it means in part that there was a first
person who did that although more likely
there was an assemblage of people who
aggregated that particular ability say
the ability to play music across a very
very large amount of time but these are
preliterate people right and they're
trying to remember the past and so what
happens Mercia Elliot documented this
quite well is that that aggregation of
people gets collapsed into a single meta
person and that's the hero of old and so
and we already talked about how this
works is that you know there are
admirable people and then you can tell a
story about an admirable person and then
you can extract a story out of the set
of admirable people and you keep
building higher and higher order ad able
people until you extract out at the top
what's ultimately admirable and this is
actually an indication of that process
occurring the giants that are being
referred to in this particular phrase
are the heroes of the past who
established the traditions on which the
the society exists and so that's all
compacted into this little paragraph So
this little paragraph here there were
giants in the earth in those days and
after that when the sons of God came
into the daughters of men and they bear
children to them the same became Mighty
Men which were of old men of renown well
you could hardly say I think there's
very little difference between what I
just told you and what this story says I
mean it says it as if it was something
that literally occurred but in some
sense it doesn't exactly say that it
says well the ancient landscape was a
landscape of heroic adventurers it's
like well we do that to our own history
right I mean even when we consider it
literal history we we don't pick pick
people at random to historicize we pick
people who had some substantive impact
and tell stories about them and and
they're emblematic in some sense of the
spirit of striving that characterizes
humanity and and so you you can't have
history without some mythologization
because the mythologization occurs at
the level of the selection of the
entities about which you're going to
weave the historical tale so okay so
anyway so there's a little there a
little interlude there that that talks
about the appearance of Heroes in the
past but then it's just that's just done
with very very
rapidly and then we move into another
story and this is the story of Noah so
the way it looks to me is
that the the part of Genesis that I'm
going to talk to you about ends with the
flood myth and also with the Tower of
Babel and so the flood myth is the Des
demolition of everything that came
before and the Tower of Babel in some
sense is exactly the same thing so
there's two chaotic I mean it's like the
fall occurs in stages there's paradise
and then Adam and Eve fall into culture
and then Cain and Abel Cain falls into
chaos and then the entire Society falls
into chaos and the flood comes and the
Tower of Babel is produced and then
that's the end of the truly archaic
parts of the Bible and so what that
seems to me what's happening it's very
sophisticated is that there's a implicit
causal narrative being wor woven about
the manner in which Cain responds and
the probability that human beings are
going to deteriorate and the flood is
going to come so and God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth
and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually and it repented the Lord
that he had made man on Earth and it
grieved him at his heart well we already
encountered a story like that once
already right that happened in the
martic story where Kat and absu give
rise to the Elder gods and they kill
absu which was not a very smart idea
right they demolish the substructure of
their stable society and of course chaos
comes flooding back well what does it
mean to say that um human
beings let's see to say
that the wickedness of man was great in
the earth and that every imagination of
the heart of his thoughts of his heart
was only evil continually is not much
different than to say that people are
acting in a manner that demolishes the
cultural structure now we've already
even pointed out that the cultural
structure that happens in the story was
produced by the heroic Giants of the
past right and we we've also noted that
what Cain is objecting to in his c-like
manner is the social structure which
isn't rewarding him properly and the
Transcendence that's above that and the
spirit of logos itself he's is rejecting
all that okay so the issue here is that
when that sort of evil is produced
exactly as when absu is slayed slayed I
guess that's right by the by the Elder
Gods then all hell breaks loose all
chaos comes back now Tiamat if you
remember correctly is the god of the
salt water goddess of the salt water and
so the return of Tiamat and the flood
are mythologically similar ideas now
elad has taken apart flood myths from
all over the world and he made two
brilliant comments about them and
they're also akin to some degree to what
you can see in the Egyptian story about
Seth and the corruption of the state so
because the Egyptians figured out that
there's always a power working within
the state let's say that corrupted it
now that was Seth and that was always
working for its overthrow it's an idea
like Satan and I said that the the word
Seth becomes the word Satan through
Coptic Christianity so so the iliad's
idea was this that Things Fall Apart of
their own accord merely because they age
that that's the first Motif in the flood
story and that's only to say that if you
build something it it decays if you
build something and you just leave it
the hell alone it will soon not work
right and that's entropy so one of the
reasons that the flood always threatens
is merely because of entropy and you see
that reflected in the Egyptian story
because one of the reasons that Osiris
Falls prey to Seth is because he's old
you know he was a great hero when he was
young and created the Egyptian State
like the men of renown but now he's old
and it's worse he's willfully blind but
that's the next thing but the fact that
he's old is just to start Things Fall
Apart of their own accord so once
something is given to you you have to
maintain it just to ensure its continued
existence and so you actually you
actually have a contract with most of
the things that you own it's it's like a
it's it's like a a moral contract let's
say you have a car well you've decided
that you're going to sacrifice to have
the car
and so you've you've performed an
ethical calculation but the car was only
worth the sacrifice as long as it
functions as a car and so what that
means is that to justify the sacrifice
you made to have the car you have to
maintain the car because otherwise
you're acting out the proposition that
the thing you sacrificed for actually
didn't have any value and so you're
obliterating that as a useful contract
and you run into the situation where the
car will just deteriorate of its own
accord and then you won't have a car at
all
well so let's say how do you speed the
process by which your car deteriorates
well that's easy you're driving it along
the road and it starts to make a ticking
noise tick tick tick tick tick and you
think I should go have that ticking
noise checked because you've heard it
and then you think no it won't matter
it's like yeah probably it'll matter and
what does matter mean well matter is
mother that's chaos too you know matter
but what it means is that that little
ticking noise is the birthplace of
Tiamat in your car that's a good way of
thinking about it is that it's your
first indication that the dragon of
chaos is going to manifest itself in
your car that happens when you I've got
a funny story about that
so I had a friend in in in graduate
school someone I really liked but I
wouldn't call her mea mechanically
inclined let's put it that way and she
had an old Honda and those things were
notorious for rusting out this is 30
years ago when they were first produced
they weren't adapted well to Canadian
Winters and we used to go in her car in
her home and it got a little on the
scary side because it was so Rusty
underneath that you could actually see
through the floorboards and that
actually made me nervous because if you
can see through the floorboards that
means that they're not really
floorboards what they are is like rust
and so I I mentioned the fact that that
might be a problem to her a couple of
times but she was sort of ble about it
and one day she was driving down St
Lawrence Street in Montreal which is the
main street running roughly north and
south and her hood popped up it bent and
popped up spontaneously and so she was
really curious about that and so she was
with this friend of hers who was just as
clueless mechanically as she was which
is really quite remarkably clueless and
so they pulled off into a service
station and had the guy come out and
look at it and well he he opened the
hood obviously and what had happened was
the body had fallen off the frame so and
what had happened was the shock which is
like supposed to be attached to the car
had pushed up through the through the uh
the hood so literally the car body had
like Fallen onto the ground and but she
was she managed to drive the car okay so
look that's I wouldn't exactly call that
willful blindness because perhaps there
was an element of willful blindness she
didn't know anything about mechanics but
you get the point right it's like let's
say she would have been in a fatal
accident you might say well you can
shake your fist at God for producing the
circumstances but you know the fact that
you could see through the floorboards
that's probably something that you might
have paid attention to and so it's
always the question is that if Things
Fall Apart around you to what degree is
it the mere tendency of things to
degenerate entropically because they do
that of their own accord or have you
sped the probability of Decay by failing
to pay attention when when a little
snake manifests itself inside your
paradise and it's always it's always a
question so and here's a here's an
example an interesting example I think
so I thought about the actual floods
like the New Orleans flood okay so New
Orleans is built where there are floods
everyone knows that and it's a major
port in the United States a huge part of
American Trade goes down the rivers to
New Orleans so there was a reason it was
built where it was even though it was a
dangerous place to build it and in order
to maintain New Orleans they had to
build these levies that kept the water
back now the American what is it
American Army Corps of Engineers if I
remember correctly was responsible for
building and maintaining the levies and
the the dkes okay Holland is also built
underwater as you may or may not know
and theyve built huge dyes to keep the
ocean back so they could reclaim the
land and that's basically Holland
Holland is an unbelievably organized
society and part of the reason is it
isn't land it's underwater and so if
you're not bloody well awake in Holland
then the ocean comes in and you all
drown and so the Dutch are very very
careful about such things and they build
their Dy so that they calculate storm
intensity and then they calculate the
inity of the worst storm in 10,000 years
and then they build the dyes to
withstand that storm the Army Corps of
Engineers built the dyes in New Orleans
to withstand the worst storm in a 100
years and they knew that was
insufficient and New Orleans Louisiana
is an unbelievably corrupt state and you
can't dump money in there to fix things
because people just steal all the money
so and then nothing gets fixed and so
then what happens there's a hurricane
and then what happens there's a flood
and everybody says why would God send
the flood and the answer to that is well
was there flood or were the dkes not
high enough and that's what's so
interesting is that it's always this is
a great father versus great mother
conundrum if a system fails is it
because of the surround overwhelming the
system or is it because the system was
insufficiently awake and doomed itself
okay so ilot its take on the flood myth
is this God comes along and floods the
world periodically why and that that's
the catastrophic influx of chaos right
so chaos will wipe you out from time to
time why well entropy does in your
conceptual schemes and your willful
blindness speeds the process and
remember that's what the Egyptians said
about Osiris right they said he was he
was a great king a man of renown but he
was
old but he was also willfully blind and
it was the combination of his age and
his willful blindness that allowed Seth
to chop him up into pieces and and
depose him and so that with fair enough
it's brilliant right it's like why do
states fall apart because the structures
get old and no one's taking care of them
and people have their eyes closed and so
it's the same situation it's the same
situation in the flood mid it's like
well yeah Things Fall Apart and they're
going to flood but if you were awake
enough and you were on top of it then
you could continually Stave that off and
actually partly what you're doing
because you're alive is staving off
entropy like you're an anti-entropic
process that's a really good definition
of life there's a great physicist named
irn Schrodinger who wrote a book called
what is life and that's the fundamental
thesis of the book you're always trying
to stve off entropy what's the best way
to stve off entropy Decay chaos keep
your eyes open that's the rule shut your
eyes especially to things you know you
should see the flood comes and that's
the evil of man that's laid out in this
story because that's the worst sort of
perhaps it's not the worst it's one of
the primary sins so to speak that will
bring about the flood we already talked
about about the other things that
characterized Cain's attitude
so there we
go so God's upset because he made man on
the earth and it grieved him at his
heart and God says I will destroy man
whom I have created from the face of the
Earth both man and Beast and the
creeping thing and the fowls of the air
for I Repent that I've made them but
Noah found Grace in the eyes of the Lord
okay so now that's an interesting thing
so here what we have is the the question
is the whole world's in chaos at this
point right in this point in the story
and the chaos is of multiple sorts it's
it arose from the fall it Rose from the
emergence of self-consciousness it
emerged say rose from the sins of of
Cain like things are not going well it's
multiple levels of collapse and it's got
to the point where God's saying this is
a mess like it's such a mess that the
whole thing has to be washed away the
first fall wasn't enough even Cain's
collapse wasn't enough we're going to
just scrub the whole bloody thing clean
so it's it's the ultimate and traumatic
collapses the question is well what do
you do in the face of the ultimate in
traumatic collapses and the answer is in
the story so Noah is someone who finds
fa who finds favor in the eyes of God so
he's like Abel there's something that
Noah is doing right that's going to
enable him to ride out the storm and so
the question here it's the same question
do you want to have a life where there's
no storms
or do you want to have a life where you
can ride out the
storms that's the issue right are you
behind the dkes or do you build a boat
do you Captain the boat that's the same
idea and so the idea here is that the
thing that rides out the chaos is the
thing that builds and Captain the boat
it's another dominance hierarchy idea
what should be at the top well it's it's
the top of something that doesn't get
flooded out as well what should be at
the top well it's to be the boat builder
and to be the captain of the boat it's
not to be hidden from the flood
precisely and so I mean here's a here's
here's something to think about identity
identity politics because that's what
we're up to our neck in okay are you who
you are can I box you in will you accept
that as an identity so I could do that
lots of ways you're male you're Asian
you're young right there's things about
you that I can derive because of your
putative membership in a set of
different groups the problem with doing
that is that the number of groups that I
can assign you to is Without End so I
have to pick arbitrary groups to assign
you to and you can accept that if you
want but there's no evidence that those
are the proper canonical groups but
maybe you're happy about that because
now you've been assigned membership in a
group and that's your identity okay so
the question is
well fine what happens when that
identity is blown into
pieces then
what well here's here's the answer to
some degree and this is the answer
that's embedded in the story of
Noah if you want to withstand
chaos do you want to be who you are or
do you want to be the thing that changes
who you are
constantly that's the question and
that's the difference that's the
difference there's a categorical
difference in identity are you who you
are or are you the thing that could
continually be more than you are and
that's the thing that is isn't the
stable identity it's not the initial
State it's also not the state of being
in chaos that nihilistic State let's say
and it's not even the state of
reformulation that occurs after you've
gone through the process it's the state
of continually going through the process
so you can identify with the thing that
trans you can identify identify with the
thing that you are or you can identify
with the thing that transforms who you
are right and that's the same as the
state subjugating itself to the
individual because the individual is the
thing that transforms the state and what
the state should do the state's
necessary because obviously it organizes
all of us into peaceful cooperation and
competition the state's necessary then
the question is is the state the highest
good and the answer to that is well it
can't be because it's old and dead and
blind and so if the state becomes the
highest good then you're occupied by the
spirit of something that's old and dead
and blind well that's not only not good
for you because then you're old and dead
and blind but it's also bad for the
state because as soon as the state gets
old and dead and blind God gets unhappy
with it and the chaos comes in and
washes it away so it seems like a bad
solution so what's the proper solution
you subordinate your group identity to
the identity that transforms your
identity right and the state
subordinates its power to the vision and
articulation of the individual because
that's what revives the state and so
that's what these stories are trying to
stumble towards roughly speaking so Noah
found Grace in the eyes of the Lord why
well Noah was a just man and perfect in
his generations and Noah walked with God
now you remember in the Adam and Eve
story Adam was walking with God to begin
with but then he got all self-conscious
and hid behind a bush and when God came
to walk with him he blamed his wife for
for his insufficiencies which I still
think that's such an unbelievably comic
story I just can't believe it it's so
absolutely ridic ulous but that's
exactly what happened while you have
Noah here and Noah Noah is like a
counter another counterpart to some
degree to Cain no is a just man and he
walks with God and so he's oriented
properly and because he's oriented
properly when the flood comes not only
does he manage to get through it as an
individual he manages to get through it
with his family and he saves and well he
saves he roughly saves the world that's
how the story puts it Forward I mean
it's an arc and it's full of animals and
you know it's it's got a child's story
element to it in fact I suspect it
probably was a story that was primarily
told to Children you know it's like a
fable but it's a fable with punch like
the Pinocchio story is a fable with
punch it's like well yeah there's going
to be a flood there's always a flood
there's always a flood so who are you if
you want to get through the flood well
then you're Noah you're the thing that
builds the boat you're the thing that
acts justly you're the thing that walks
with God we already know what that means
you identify with the Transcendent
that's like japedo pointing to the star
before the transformation process that
occurs with Pinocchio it's your
identifying with the benevolent Spirit
of the state so you have a relationship
with the Transcendent and the benevolent
Spirit of the state and you're also
identified with the capacity to generate
chaos out of order and the reverse
that's what it means to walk with God
roughly speaking it's across all of
those Dimensions so what does that do it
gives you the power to withstand the
flood and to bring people and
and and being itself and civilization
along with you and that's the story of
Noah so it's a precursor it's it's
another Abel is a precursor to the idea
of the redeeming Messiah right Noah is a
precursor to the idea of the redeeming
Messiah you can think about them as
Proto Messiah or Proto metah Heroes
something like that and they manifest
themselves they're part of the Giants
that walked in the past and they're
embodied their attempts embodied in
story to elus
the the triangle that's at the top of
the pyramid right the ey that's at the
top of the pyramid
so so I won't tell you the rest of the
Noah story
because I I don't think it's necessary
for us to to to to delve into the to the
more narrative details
um but I do want to so it's a pretty
rough I can point out it's a pretty
rough story every living substance was
destroyed which was upon the face of the
ground both Man and Cattle and creeping
things and the fall of the heaven and
they were destroyed from the earth and
Noah only remained alive and they that
were with him in the ark it's a very
terrifying story you know and and uh
it's worth attending to because we are
currently in a period of extreme chaos
so okay so anyways works out God's had
enough he's killed enough he's killed
enough of everything it's a it's a
traumatic occurrence we can put it that
way the waters recede and God uh God has
done for the time being and so then this
is what happens at the
end
so the ark settled down they're
unloading it and creation is reborn and
so then you think well what sets things
right again between man and God and the
story says that Noah built an altar unto
the Lord and took of every clean beast
and of every clean fowl and offered
burnt offerings on the altar so it's the
same idea here it's that the same idea
that you started to see emerging in the
can and Abel story what is it that sets
things right between man and God
sacrifice so the flood comes then Noah
makes the proper sacrifices right it's
part of reestablishing the proper order
he makes the proper sacrifices and so
God is happy with the sacrifices which
is a good thing given that he's pretty
ordinary and
um and and the Lord smelled a sweet
Savor so remember I told you before that
the reason people thought that this
would work was because the smoke would
rise up and God would be able to detect
whether or not the the sacrifice was of
high quality well you have it written
right there you know it's very uh
concretized image of of of the
archetypal Spirit right the Lord smelled
a sweet Savor and said in his heart I
will not curse the ground anymore for
man's sake for the imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth neither
will I again Smite anymore every living
thing as I have done so that's pretty
nice is Noah sacrifice actually calms
down God down to the point where he says
well I'm not going to wipe everything
out again it's like well fair enough you
know but it I would consider it somewhat
of a tenuous contract because we've seen
more than one example in the recent
Century where we came bloody close to
wiping everything out
again while the Earth remains seed time
and harvest and cold and heat and summer
and winter and day and night shall not
cease neither again will I smite any
more every living thing as I have done
so all right so that's
that he basically tells Noah the same
thing again that he told Adam at the
beginning of of the of the Genesis story
so fine and then he he tells them a
bunch of rules which I could go into but
at the moment I won't but I want to show
you
that basically what God I guess I should
do this to some
degree God lays out a bunch of rules so
you could think about it as a precursor
to what happens in the story of Exodus
where the Ten Commandments are revealed
so this is like a foreshadowing of that
story Noah makes the proper sacrifices
and God says okay fine here's the rules
follow these rules and and then they're
laid out and things will go okay with
you that's the Covenant that's the
agreement between the IND you could say
that's the agreement between the
individual and the spirit of the state
that's one way of looking at but it's
not enough because it isn't merely the
spirit of the state that's being
negotiated with it's the spirit of the
state it's the spirit of that which
transcends the state and it's the spirit
of the moral order that's within the
individual all three of those things are
being negotiated simultaneously the
proper sacrifices are made the proper
rules are laid out and the and the idea
is that there'll be a good balance
between Order and Chaos as a consequence
as long as people continue to play by
the rules so that's the offering
fundamentally so fine that seems to work
out
and then this one I think is extremely
interesting it's also very short it took
me a very very long time to to
understand
this all right so this is after the
story of Noah so what happens is you get
this situation where things descend into
chaos and there's a great flood so
that's sort of like the ultimate chaos
story and I think of it as a it's there
so you imagine When Things Fall Apart
one possibility is that they fall into
chaos the other possibility is something
like they become
hyper conceptualized and Hyper orderly
and so then the state itself which would
be the antidote to chaos actually
becomes a source of pathology and I
think that that's what's being hinted at
in the story of the Tower of Babel so
here's what happens is that human beings
I'll read it to you um this is this has
to do with Noah's descendants it's a
flip into another story and it came to
pass as they journeyed from the East oh
yes and all the days of Noah were 950
years and he died new story and the
whole earth was of one language and one
speech everybody's getting along fine in
their tribal organization let's say it's
homogeneous they can all speak to one
another and they all speak the same
language and it came to pass as they
journeyed from the East that they found
a plane in the land of shinar and they
dwelt there and they said to one another
go to let us make brick and burn them
thoroughly and they had brick for stone
and slime had they for Mortar and they
said go
to go to let us build a city and a tower
whose top May reach unto heaven and let
us make a name lest we be scattered
abroad upon the face of the whole earth
okay so what's happening
here only the bear this is this what
this story means is very deeply implicit
in the story it's hinting at it and I
think it's because it was really beyond
the power of the conceptualization of
the people who generated this story to
elaborate it to any great detail but I
think what it means is this is
that there's a guy named Robin I think
it's Robin Dunbar and one of the things
that Dunbar has done is do a very in
detailed correlation analysis of
cortical expansion and group size and
what he showed is that um if you if you
plot primates by cortical size let's say
you correct it for body size you plot
primates by cortical size and then you
plot the size of their social groups you
see a very tight relationship between
the size of the social group and the
size of the cortex the optimal human
social group is like 200 individuals or
something like that which is maybe
roughly the number of people that you
can reasonably track on Facebook after
that it's like well there's names but
you don't know those people you're not
capable of tracking social dynamics that
are any more complex than that partly
because you have other problems to solve
and so one of the things that has been
observed is that human groups tend to
fractionate if they start to exceed 200
and maybe that's partly because you
can't keep track of the complexity but
there's another constraint which is you
want your group to be big enough so that
it protects you but you want it to be
small enough so that you can climb to
the top because and so when the group
gets really really really really
big well maybe it can protect you
although it also doesn't give a damn
about you like once you're 160,000 of
the group like you are at the University
of Toronto or 130 millionth of the
country or maybe 1300 millionth of
Europe which is partly why Europe is
going to fragment because that's just
not enough right you're just not enough
there this the group is too big what
happens you keep aggregating the group
it gets more and more powerful and you
can think of that as something that has
the capacity to replace the trans
Transcendent right we'll make a society
that's perfect it's like a utopian
Vision that's what I see happening in
this story it's like we'll make
something so great on the part of human
beings that it will reach up to heaven
itself which means it will take the
place of God that's what it means that's
exactly what the Communists did in
Soviet Russia and that's what they tried
to do in in China too and so that's why
you ended up with people like Stalin as
the God so you talk about getting what
you deserve so anyways so you build
these monolithic enter Enterprises let's
call them State Enterprises and the idea
there is that the state the the hyper
organized and all-inclusive State can
bring about Utopia that's what it means
to reach to heaven so what happens so
God gets wind of that and he says God
says uh the Lord came down to see the
city and the tower which the children of
men built and the Lord said hm behold
the people is one and now they all have
one language and this they begin to do
and now nothing will be restrained from
them which they have imagined to do go
to let us go down and therefore confound
their language that they may not
understand one another's speech well
it's interesting because it's sort of
you the story kind of portrays it as
Jealousy on God's part right it's like
oh these these human beings they're
they're building so magnificently that
they're starting to challenge my
Dominion well I'm going to go down there
and play a trick or two on them and
that'll that'll take care of that so
what
happens the people within the so the
group gets bigger and bigger and bigger
and bigger and biger and what happens it
starts to fragment that is what happens
that's exactly what happens that's part
of the reason why the totalitarian state
Enterprise to replace the Transcendent
with structure that's one of the reasons
it's doomed as you pull more and more
people in what happens is you start to
pull in chaos itself and that starts to
fragment the order here's an interesting
thing I think that's happening with the
so the LGBT power groups are exclusion
excluded groups right and so so it
started out with gay rights and then one
of the things that's happened that's so
interesting so you could think of there
was a normative group and there was
excluded people okay and so one section
of the excluded people stood up and said
hey you know enough of this exclusion so
we're going to categorize ourselves and
we're going to fight for recognition as
the excluded we're going to fight to be
included but what happens is well it's l
and then it's lb and then it's LBG and
then it's LGBT and the last thing I saw
which was actually handed to medical
students in at the University of Toronto
there's 20 letters why well
because you can't this is tangentially
related to this story only you can't
come up with a category of the things
that don't fit inside categories because
there's an infinite number of things
that don't fit inside categories and so
when you try to build a category out of
all uncategorically entities all that
happens is it starts to fragment because
there's actually no Unity there and what
one of the things you are starting to
see is that there's power battles
emerging on the part of the excluded on
the left and it's inevitable be and I
think that's what this story is trying
to represent is that you can't build the
state up Beyond a certain size if you do
it will fragment and fall apart the
people within it will no longer speak
the same language and they'll they'll
they'll disperse themselves to different
corners of the earth and so I think
we're actually in real danger of
forgetting this and one of the things
that I saw read a couple of ominous
things so if you plot the size of
economic catastrophes over the last 30
years they're getting bigger each time
so that's scary now part of that is
because the world economy is getting
bigger and so maybe you have to control
for that but the magnitude of the chaos
has been increasing with each collapse
okay one of the things that came out of
the last collapse 2008 was the
government rescuing collapsed companies
like AIG and and the Royal Bank of
Scotland which by the way was the
biggest company in the world no one
knows that but Royal Bank of Scotland
collapsed it was the biggest company in
the world and AIG was the insurer of
insurers and so it collapsed too they
were rescued by the government and maybe
fair enough but one of the motifs that
came out of that was the idea of too big
to
fail well this story says wait a second
it says too big means
definite failure it means inevitable
failure and that strikes me as highly
probable is that there's a warning in
this story although it's it's it's a
it's a bare story right it's only four
or five lines it's just the outlines but
it's placed in a very particular place
it's placed right after the flood right
it's like well there's the nihilistic
chaos of the flood and then there's the
temp totalitarian temptation to build
hyper structures that can theoretically
replace the Transcendent well what
happens you build the hyp structure and
it fragments from within and then people
don't speak the same language and they
and they you know distribute themselves
sort of chaotically on the surface of
the Earth
so therefore is the name of it called
Babel because the Lord did there
confound the language of all the Earth
and from then did the Lord scatter them
abroad upon the face of all the earth I
think the other issue too is is that
what's the problem with the
homogenization of a group it's like you
bring everyone into the group and then
they're all the same uniformity well the
advantage is you can understand
everyone the disadvantage is there's no
variability left right there's no
variability everyone is a clone of
everyone else and that's great if you
know where you're going and you know how
to get there but it's really really bad
if the underlying structure shifts on
you because the fact that you're adapted
to one situation hyper adapted to one
situation might mean that you're cont
completely not adapted to the next
situation you build groups that are too
big and too homogeneous they're
effective but only within the limited
range of their map and if the map no
longer functions then the whole thing
sinks and that's I think what happens in
this particular story and then okay at
the end of that then what happens is
that soon afterwards I think perhaps
immediately afterwards the story of
Abraham emerges and that's really I
would say that's when
the the prime myths the Primal myths
take on a more historical element and
and history you know roughly speaking
history as we know it begins something
like 6,000 years ago so and then then
you know the rest of the biblical
stories proceed a pace from there what
basically happens is that this is
something that was well mapped out by
Northrop fry and you'd think at the
University of Toronto that you all would
have been encouraged to read northr fry
because he was perhaps the greatest
literary scholar that the University of
Toronto ever produced and um what he he
outlined the Old Testament very
interestingly said that what happens
after these initial stories is that the
state arises so it's it's like the Tower
of Babel is continually rebuilt over and
over and it's the state of Israel the
Israel Israelites get their act together
build a state what
happens they get corrupt a prophet comes
up and says you better watch out because
what you're doing is not making God
happy and the prophets are very brave
because they come forward the the kings
are authoritarian they can kill them at
an instant but the prophets are moved by
walk with god let's say for lack of a
better argument they come to the king
and say look you're not caring for the
widows and the children right you think
that's okay because they're weak it's
not okay you're breaking the Covenant
you're breaking the rules and the price
for that is well we already saw it the
price for that is the flood it's like
get your act together or you're going to
be sorry now sometimes the Kings to whom
the prophets speak listen but often they
don't and then the whole bloody state is
demolished and then the Israelites are
back like they're enslaved or they get
wiped out by their enemies or like it's
a complete bloody catastrophe and it
lasts for centuries then they kind of
struggle back up and make another state
and then they get arrogant and then it
gets corrupt and then a prophet comes
along and says you know what happened
last time it's like well that was 600
years ago right and I know everything
now so I don't have to pay any attention
to you it's they ignore it and then
because and the prophets say you are
violating a fundamental moral order
you're supposed to as king you're
supposed to be subject to something
higher than yourself right it's like the
idea that the Mesopotamians had that the
emperor was supposed to be an emissary
of Marduk that's why he was the emperor
because he was a good Marduk he could
confront chaos and make order that was
what gave him his sovereignty or the
Egyptian pharaoh was a combination of
Osiris and Horus that's what gave him
sovereignty and so the idea was you get
to be king but you have to act out the
spirit of being King and if you don't do
that then well king or not all hell's
going to break loose for you
and that's what the prophets continually
say but the Israelites you know they
don't pay enough attention and they
continue to get absolutely demolished
and so the Old Testament can be read at
least in part as the description of a
sequence of of the rise and fall of of
states and their descent into corruption
and chaos and so we'll leave it at that
because I want to tell you the next part
of the story the last part of the story
roughly speaking in our next lecture
which is also the last lecture so we've
got about 12 minutes if we want it so if
anybody has any questions you can ask
them or we can and if you don't then we
could call it a day so does any
well it's a lot of information so and
it's a lot of strange information so I'm
curious you know if if
it what you make of
it yep uh so two two sort of separate
and Inter intermingling questions um you
were talking about Europe being around
300 million people so why is why is a
group of similar size which is America
uh it will it face similar you think the
right and left can talk to each other
you think they speak the same language
right right right right you see that
fragmenting occurring and they really
are not only are they speaking different
languages they're they really are
speaking different languages it's the
right way of thinking about it yes it's
very very dangerous you know I I think
the US worked for a long time first of
all because it didn't always have 300
million people it's a lot of people to
put under one umbrella now the the
utility of the American system is that
it is a hierarchy right there's
individuals families towns States
underneath a somewhat loose Federal
structure and that sort of so it's not a
it's not a monolith where everyone has
to speak precisely the same language
it's got some flexibility built into its
structure cuz it's it's com it's it's
it's formulated into components which
have a certain amount of autonomy and so
far that's worked sufficiently well
whether it will and it'll probably
continue to work I mean the Americans
are a very very robust people and
they've gone through things that are
analogous to what they're going through
now many times God only knows right but
but it's very dangerous thing to presume
that the Americans are down for the
count because they have an uncanny
ability to rise out From the Ashes even
stronger than they were before but you
can certainly see the danger lurking in
Europe that's that's a different thing
like I think the European state is
doomed because I think it grew too fast
and it it severed the connection between
like there's not the proper hierarchy of
of identification so and people are
saying wait I Brussel like who the hell
are you guys why are you making
decisions for us and we don't agree with
your decisions and like are you sure
that Greece and Germany can be in the
same place because that's by no means
self-evident right the Germans aren't
very happy about it and the Greeks
aren't very happy about it and one of
the rules for making an organization is
that it's a lot easier to make a
functional organization worse than it is
to make a dysfunctional organization
better and so you might say well you've
got Germany and France and England well
let's say Germany and France powerhouses
especially Germany they can afford to
bring Greece in
well maybe but there's no evidence that
they can afford it so I mean Greece is
unbelievably corrupt no one pays their
income tax that's a big problem right
and bringing them into a union at a high
order has no effect whatsoever on the
micro behaviors and the thing is the
micro behaviors have to be rectified and
no one really knows how to do that how
do you stop a country where people don't
pay their taxes from how do you stop the
people from not paying their taxes why
do we pay our taxes who knows we could
just all of a sudden decide not to you
know and the government wouldn't have
the resources to run around Gathering
them all up for one reason or another
it's become customary for people in
functional Western democracies to pay
their taxes but
why who knows it would have been way
easier for us just to do what the Greeks
did and pretend to pay them you know so
they're too big I think and so the
people on the right are saying back to
the nation like I understand why they're
doing that
but
but the danger is the nation will sub
ordinate the individual and I do see it
as another example of safe spaces it's
just scales different so and that's why
I think that the proper antidote to that
to both the chaos on the left and the
order on the right roughly speaking is
to walk the proper line in the middle
and and we better do that because things
are not things are too chaotic at the
moment so it's not good maybe it's
really good that's possible but we're in
a state where I really believe we're in
a state where things could
go any number of ways and there's no
there's no predicting it so and I've
never felt that you
know I I mean I lived in the 80s and you
know political correctness rose up in
the '90s as well and I can remember a
lot of what happened in the early '70s
with the oil crisis and all that so
there were times when things were shaky
but they weren't shaky the way they are
now they're an internal shakiness rather
than something that was a threat that
was seemed to be imposed from the
outside and that's different
and and it's it's it's it's it is
associated with with this intellectual
War that's going on with postmodernism
and neomarxism and all of that as well
so um the future authoring program
there's a heavy emphasis on the need to
use image me to conceptualize the ideal
and worst future you've mentioned that
the program's positive effects are much
more pronounced than men specifically
nonwestern ethnic men um so I wanted to
ask or imagery specifically gold
directed imagery and visual spatial
ability related and if so given that men
on average have greater visual visual
spatial ability could this account for
the gender difference in the program's
efficacy that's a lot of questions
they're good questions um well I'll tell
you a couple of strange things that that
things that I don't really understand
the first is when we've done the
analysis of the effects of the future
authoring program it has had a different
differential impact on men and it's had
a particularly differential impact on
what I would call excluded men and so
that would be non-western ethnic
minority men or or what majority men who
aren't doing very well so for example at
Mohawk College the future authoring
program had a particularly robust effect
on Mohawk college students who were men
who hadn't done very well in high school
and who hadn't picked a major that had a
destination a career destination at its
end
so you can imagine those people are they
have an ambiguous relationship with the
idea of education and they're not
oriented specifically towards a goal
they're not very
motivated now why did it have a
differential effect on men that's a good
question well first of all the women are
doing better so it might just be a
matter of the fact that it does better
for people who aren't doing as well and
at the moment most of them are men I
don't believe I think that might be part
of it but I don't believe that's all of
it I think that part of the reason that
women are doing better is because
they're agreeable and so if a system
sets out a structure and says here's a
pathway to attainment the women won't
rebel against that they'll go along with
it and that's working very well for them
at the moment the men especially the men
on the disagreeable end of the
distribution and there's way more men on
the dist disagreeable end of the
distribution than there are women right
that's what you get from if you look at
overlapping normal distributions so
there's the male dist female
distribution for agreeableness
male distribution for agreeableness
tremendous overlap okay women are higher
all the really agreeable people are
women all the really disagreeable people
are men and maybe the real differences
occur at the extremes right so so and
it's it's a very interesting side effect
of overlapping distributions so they
people can be mostly the same but that
can still produce radical
differences disagreeable men won't do
anything they don't want to do they just
say up yours I'll go home and play video
games you with you I'm not listen to
your stupid classes and why should I
work for you I'll just go have fun I'll
do my own thing I don't think they're
motivated and so then if you take the
men who are like that and you say okay
what do you want you can have what you
want but you have to figure out what it
is so then they write down what they
want they think oh hey well that might
be worth having so maybe I'll put some
effort into it that's what it looks like
to me now you know that's weak evidence
and this is a weak argument but I'm
trying to stretch out my understanding
to account for this but I'll tell you
something else that's really weird I
don't understand this either so more
than 90% of the people who watch my
videos on YouTube are men now that's
weird because not about 80% of
psychology students are women so that is
not what you would expect right you
would expect that the majority of them
would be women and you might say well
it's because of the political stance
I've taken and I thought well that's
possible so I went and looked at the
demographic data because I have that
well before I did any of the political
videos 85% of my viewers were men so
it's actually increased a bit it's
increased by 6% and that's not trivial
but it was still overwhelmingly meant so
that was interesting I thought what the
hell why is that exactly and then now
I've been watching crowds when I've been
talking to them and the crowds that have
come to see me in person this happened
at the University of Toronto Free Speech
debate and I actually noticed it and
commented on it before the debate took
place because I was talking about
intrinsic differences between men and
women and I looked around the room and I
thought hm hey 80% of the people in this
room are men so I had all the men St
women women stand up and then all the
men stand up I said look like here's a
natural experiment for some reason 80%
of the people who showed up to this are
men now everybody thought I was kind of
cracked to to do that and it was a risk
you know and and I but I thought no
there's something going on here and then
what's interesting now is that every
public appearance that I've made that's
related to the sort of topics that we're
discussing is overwhelmingly
it's like it's like 85 to 90% And so I
thought wow that's weird like what the
hell's going on here exactly and then
the other thing I've noticed is that
I've been talking a lot to the crowds
that I've been talking to not about
rights but about responsibility right
because you can't have the bloody
convers what are you doing you can't
have the conversation about rights
without the conversation about
responsibility because your rights are
my responsibility that's what they are
technically so you just can't have only
half of that that discussion and we're
only having half that discussion the
question is well what the hell are you
leaving out if you only have that half
of the discussion and the answer is well
you're leaving out responsibility and
then the question is well what are you
leaving out if you're leaving out
responsibility and the answer might be
well maybe you're leaving out the
meaning of life that's what it looks
like to me it's like here you are
suffering away what makes it worthwhile
rights you know you're completely out
you're completely you have no idea what
you're you it's almost impossible to
describe how bad an idea that is
responsibility That's What Gives Life
Meaning it's like lift a load then you
can tolerate yourself right cuz look at
you're useless easily hurt easily killed
why should you have any self-respect
that's the the story of the Fall pick
something up and carry it pick make it
heavy enough so that you can think yeah
well useless as I am at least I could
move that from there to there well
what's really cool about that is that
when I talk to these crowds about this
the men's eyes light up and that's very
like I've seen that phenomena because
I've been talking about this
mythological material for a long time
and I can see when I'm watching crowds
people you know their eyebrows lift
their eyes let light out because I've
put something together for them that's
what mythological stories do so I'm not
taking responsibility for that that's
what the stories do so I say the story
and people go click click click you know
and their eyes light up but this
responsibility thing that's a whole new
order of this is that young men are so
hungry for that it is unbelievable and
one of the things I've been talking to
some of the people who've been um
running for the conservative leadership
in Canada and I've been talking to them
about well the difficulties they have
communicating with young people because
conservatives what the hell are they
going to sell to young people right
because being conservative is something
that happens when you're older they can
sell
responsibility no one's selling it and
the thing is for men there's nothing but
responsibility you know I was watching
The Simpsons the other day I watched the
first Simpsons episode and I
deconstructed it and so it's really
interesting so what happens in the first
Simpson episode is that it's Christmas
and Homer and Marge are going to buy
some Christmas presents but Homer
doesn't get his Christmas bonus and so
he's absolutely crushed by that and that
actually is a recurring theme in The
Simpsons where Homer loses his job or
something like that or can't make enough
money he's completely crushed even
though he's kind of useless bumbling
laughing fool of a guy you know the
thing that gives that show it soul is
that he's still oriented towards his
family that's what makes him honorable
is that foolish as he is he's decided to
adopt responsibility for his family and
to try to bear that and so he's not he's
a holy fool he's not a complete fool and
it's so interesting watching the story
because he suffers dreadfully as a
consequence of not being able to fulfill
his responsibility well that's for men
women have their sets of
responsibilities they're not the same
right because they're complicated
because women of course have to take
primary responsibility for for having
infants at least but then also for
caring for them they're they're
structured differently than men for
biological necessity even if it's not a
psychological issue and it's also partly
a psychological issue women know what
they have to do men have to figure out
what they have to do and if they have
nothing worth living for then they stay
Peter Pan and why the hell not
because the alternative to valued
responsibility
is impulsive low class pleasure and you
saw that in the Pinocchio story right
that's Pleasure Island it's like well
why lift the load if there's nothing in
it for you that's another thing that
we're doing to men that's a very bad
idea and to boys it's like you're
pathological and oppressive it's like
fine then why the hell am I going to
play if that's the if that's the
situation if I get no credit for bearing
responsibility you can bloody well be
sure I'm not going to Bear any but then
you know your life is useless and
meaningless and you have you're not
you're full of self-contempt and
nihilism and and that's not good and so
that's why I think I that's what I
think's going on at a deeper level with
regards to man needing this direction a
man has to decide that he's going to do
something he has to decide that and the
imagery give a sort of a tangible thing
to work towards sort of like in the
diagram from to be does it give a sort
of image to be so that command yeah well
you know partly what you're trying to do
in the future authoring process is say
okay well what's your highest value
right it's the star it's like okay what
are you aiming for you can decide man
but you know there's some criteria it
should be good for you it should be good
for you in a way that facilitates your
moving forward maybe it should be good
for you in a way that's also good for
the family and the community it should
cover the the domain of life I mean
there's constraints on what you should
regard as a value but you but within
those constraints you have the choice
you have Choice well the thing is is
that people will carry a heavy load if
they get to pick the goddamn
load so and they think well I won't
carry any load it's like okay fine but
then you're like the sled dog that
doesn't have a sled to pull you're just
going to you're going to tear pieces out
of your own legs because you're barded
you know you need people are pack
animals they need they need to pull
against a weight and and that's not true
for everyone it's not true particularly
say for low conscientious people I mean
maybe they're open and creative or
extroverted in some other things but for
the for the typical
person they they they'll eat themsel
they'll eat themselves up unless they
have a load this is why there's such an
opiate epidemic among a dispossessed
white middle-aged guys who are
unemployed in the US it's like they lose
their job they're done right they
despise themselves they develop chronic
pain syndromes and depress depression
and the chronic pain is treated with
opiates it's like that's what we're
doing so yeah that's what it looks like
to me is you you have to and it's so
interesting to watch the young men when
you talk to them about responsibility
they're godamn thrilled about it it just
blows me away it's like really that's
what's that's the
counterculture grow the hell up and do
something useful really I could do that
oh I'm so excited by that idea no one
ever mentioned that before it's like
rights rights rights rights Jesus it's
it's it's appalling it's it's and and I
feel that that's deeply felt by the
people who are who are coming out to to
listen to these sorts of things too
they're they've had enough of that so
and they better have because it's it's a
non-productive mode of being
responsibility man that's where the
meaning in life is
so all right good one more class he
we'll see you next week